class: AAP 1100
class title: The Worlds We Make
description: This co-taught class brings together faculty members from across the college and all first-year students in AAP to develop the skills necessary to work toward a more just, sustainable, equitable, and compassionate future. The Worlds We Make examines structural racism, colonialism, injustice, bias and their manifestations through the lens of architecture, art, and urban studies. Students will engage with how to identify bias, structural inequity, and systems of oppression, learn about restorative justice and harm reduction in our fields and beyond, practice allyship and make space for marginalized and historically minoritized identities. The class will emphasize communicating and advocating across differences via challenging discussion, analytical drawing, creative practice, and writing.

class: AAS 2100
class title: South Asian Diaspora
description: This interdisciplinary course (with an emphasis in anthropology) will introduce students to the multiple routes/roots, lived experiences, and imagined worlds of South Asians who have traveled to various lands at different historical moments spanning Fiji, South Africa, Mauritius, Britain, Malaysia, United States, Trinidad, and even within South Asia itself such as the Tamil-speaking population of Sri Lanka. The course will begin with the labor migrations of the 1830s and continue up to the present period. The primary exercise will be to compare and contrast the varied expressions of the South Asian Diaspora globally in order to critically evaluate this transnational identity. Thus, we will ask what, if any, are the ties that bind a fifth-generation Indo-Trinidadian whose ancestor came to the New World as an indentured laborer or "coolie" in the mid-19th century to labor in the cane fields, to a Pakistani medical doctor who migrated to the United States in the late 1980s. If Diaspora violates a sense of identity based on territorial integrity, then could "culture" serve as the basis for a shared identity?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AAS 2130
class title: Introduction to Asian American History
description: An introductory history of Chinese, Japanese, Asian Indians, Filipinos, and Koreans in the United States from the mid-nineteenth century to the 1990s. Major themes include racism and resistance, labor migration, community formation, imperialism, and struggles for equality.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AAS 2620
class title: Introduction to Asian American Literature
description: This course will introduce both a variety of writings and media by Asian North American authors and some critical issues concerning the production and reception of Asian American texts. Working with a variety of genres, we will be asking questions about the relation between literary forms and the socio-historical context within which they take on their meanings, and about the historical formation of Asian American identities. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AAS 3378
class title: Korean American Literature
description: The rapidly growing literature of the Korean diaspora is one of the most significant developments in Korean literature since the 20th century. As Korean literature has circulated as world literature, it has become more widely recognized in the Anglophone world through translation and through narratives written by Korean American authors. This course will explore Korean American literature and creative transpacific exchanges between Korea and the US, addressing issues of identity, language, place, migration, race discrimination, citizenship, and the ways in which storytelling shapes community. We will examine the vibrant dialogue between works of fiction and poetry across the Pacific, reading the work of Korean American authors alongside the writing of Korean authors working in the Korean language. Increasingly, Korean American writers are creating narratives that remember and reconfigure Korean history and Korea's relationship to the US, and we will explore narratives and poetry that offer new perspectives on the Japanese colonial period, the Korean War, and American imperialism such as Min Jin Lee's Pachinko, Chang-rae Lee's The Surrendered, and Don Mee Choi's DMZ Colony. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korea is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AAS 4950
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: AAS 7200
class title: Directed Graduate Individual Study
description: Individualized readings and research for graduate students. Topics, readings, writing requirements, and the number of course credits to be determined through consultation between the student and the faculty supervisor.

class: AAS 7300
class title: Directed Graduate Group Study
description: Independent study course in which a small group of students works with one member of the graduate faculty. Topics, readings, writing requirements, and the number of course credits to be determined through consultation between the students and the faculty supervisor.

class: AEM 1101
class title: Design Your Dyson
description: This course helps first-year students develop a deeper comprehension of the undergraduate experience within the Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management. The Design Your Dyson course fosters a sense of community around shared interests, enhances problem-solving skills through design thinking, and helps students create collaborative and lasting connections to peers, faculty, staff, alumni and the Dyson School. As they formulate a plan to get the most out of their four-year program, students will learn about the resources and opportunities available at Dyson; the course also surveys selected resources at the SC Johnson College of Business and the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, as well as Cornell generally. The course introduces our signature Grand Challenges program, and helps students envision Dyson's motto of "our business is a better world" as both a relevant personal philosophy and a practical toolkit -- a way of thinking and acting that will enhance their learning in the program and their impact after graduation.
outcome: Cultivate in broad terms the goals and methods of undergraduate business education and the role of the University in lifetime learning., Discover what distinguishes the Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, and the contributions of the School's unique place within the Cornell SC Johnson College of Business and the Cornell College of Agriculture and Life Sciences., Develop a toolkit of design principles and strategies that can apply to personal and professional problem-solving., Be able to apply design thinking to express and advance educational, career and personal goals, in the context of time at Cornell and in Dyson., Create and refine a detailed four-year academic plan that will allow for exploration and flexibility while fulfilling both the curricular and co-curricular expectations of Dyson., Demonstrate how to find and use the full array of educational resources within Dyson and Cornell., Build connections with peers and the Dyson community., Articulate the Dyson ethos of "Our Business Is a Better World" as connected to the Sustainable Development Goals., 

class: AEM 1600
class title: The Business of Modern Medicine
description: Medicine as practiced today is no longer just a profession. It has become a multi trillion dollar business. The purpose of this lecture series is to present the changes that have occurred in medical practice through the eyes of someone who has lived and practiced medicine during these tumultuous times. Students will gain a better understanding of how third-party payers, the government and other regulatory agencies, new technology, and entrepreneurship have impacted the medical profession and healthcare in general. Upon completion of the course, students will have the capacity to asses their future career paths not only from a scientific, but a business perspective.
outcome: Make strategic decisions regarding future healthcare careers., Articulate the role that business has and will play in the health professions., Develop a pro-active mindset in the constantly changing healthcare environment., 

class: AEM 2010
class title: Spreadsheet Modeling for Management and Economics
description: This course emphasizes applied decision making in the business world using Excel as a business analytics tool. The course covers theory behind decision-making and teaches students to apply tools and methods to various business scenarios throughout the semester. Understanding the value of such skills, this course will introduce students to navigating tools and applications, and typical business scenarios where such capabilities can be leveraged in business. Students dedicated to success in this course can expect to achieve a beginner to intermediate knowledge of spreadsheet modeling skills in an Excel platform. Students will enjoy a thorough exposure to real world applications and learn to demonstrate these new capabilities in a business environment. AEM 2010 will help students understand the dynamics of using Excel modeling to solve optimization problems, forecast future outcomes using assumptions and projections, and evaluate problems that involve uncertainty in order to inform business strategy and quantitative decision-making. In business analytic vernacular, students will learn to leverage descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytic methods using data.

class: AEM 2050
class title: Introduction to Agricultural Finance
description: Introductory course which provides an overview of principles and practices of agricultural and development finance, from the perspectives of the business owner, lender, and policymaker. Topics include sources of capital, financing entry into agriculture, financial analysis, capital management, financial statements, credit instruments, loan analysis, and financial risk. Applications in farm investments, the Farm Credit System, crop insurance, and risk management.
outcome: Students will learn and be able to apply financial concepts to solve financial economic problems in agriculture and development including understanding mortgages, bonds, equity, and other fundamental concepts., Students will gain an introductory knowledge and understanding to financing concepts including time value of money, financial and risk management instruments, among others., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: AEM 2100
class title: Introductory Statistics
description: Introduces statistical methods. Topics include the descriptive analysis of data, probability concepts and distributions, estimation and hypothesis testing, regression, and correlation analysis. Includes an introduction to Minitab, a statistical software package.
outcome: Attain analytical and functional competency in basic statistical skills., Demonstrate a working knowledge of ethics as it relates to statistical analysis and communication., Demonstrate the ability to solve practical problems., Develop skills to be critical consumers of business and economic research., 
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: AEM 2200
class title: Business Management and Organization
description: Foundational course, meant to familiarize students with the use of core concepts in marketing, accounting, organizational design and management, entrepreneurship and strategy, teamwork, leadership, and ethics; as well as with the Dyson/AEM major and the business careers that may follow it. Significant writing and analytical components (both individual and team based case study analysis, evaluation of a U.S. publicly traded corporation).
outcome: Become conversant with foundational concepts of marketing, entrepreneurship, accounting, strategic management, organizational design and management, teamwork, leadership and business ethics., Practice the ability to apply foundational concepts to analyze business situations, problems, and news., Become familiarized with methodologies and tools (ie. Excel) that can be applied successfully in the analysis of business situations, problems, and news., Practice the ability to apply foundational concepts through a comprehensive analysis of a US publicly traded corporation., Gain exposure to a critical stance towards business and management, and with the ethical principles associated with business and management., Become familiar with the concepts of professional career and organizational citizenship through formal exposure to the Dyson School and AEM, and mentorship in the development of a plan of studies and of a professional plan., Practice both formal and informal teamwork., 

class: AEM 2210
class title: Financial Accounting
description: This is an introductory course on financial accounting intended for non-business majors. The course examines the format and creation of the four main financial statements prepared by organizations: income statement, balance sheet, statement of shareholders' equity, and statement of cash flows.
outcome: Read and evaluate standard financial statements., Assess the financial condition and financial performance of organizations., 

class: AEM 2225
class title: Financial Accounting For Dyson Majors
description: Comprehensive introduction to financial accounting concepts and applications. Focuses primarily on recording and communicating financial information for use by external users such as investors, creditors and regulators, and is intended to provide a basic understanding of the accounting cycle, elements of financial statements, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, and financial statement interpretation. Topics include accounting for inventory, receivables, depreciation, bonds, equity, and cash flows.
outcome: Develop effective communication skills in finance., Attain analytical and functional competency in basic business and economic skills., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply to real world setting., Demonstrate ability to solve practical business problems and make an impact in real world and society., Develop skills to be critical consumers of business information and research., Develop the ability to work with computerized accounting systems., 

class: AEM 2241
class title: Finance
description: This course is a survey of topics in finance. It focuses on the mathematics of finance, valuation, the economics of managerial decisions, corporate financial policy, risk management, investments, and personal finance.
outcome: Become familiar with the "Time Value of Money" and comfortable using that concept and formulas to solve problems in the areas of corporate finance, investments, and personal finance., Become familiar with stock and bond markets and learn the economics and mathematics behind the valuation of bonds, stocks, and firms., Become familiar with modern portfolio theory including the relationship between risk and return, the concept of diversification, the capital asset pricing model, and the arbitrage pricing theory., Become familiar with corporate financial decisions such as whether to accept or reject a project ("Capital Budgeting"), how to finance operations ("Capital Structure"), if and how to make payouts to investors ("Distribution Policy"), and how to analyze potential acquisitions ("Mergers & Acquisitions")., Become familiar with using derivatives as investment and risk management tools.  Derivatives covered include options, convertibles, forward and futures contracts, and swaps., Become familiar with the concept of market efficiency and the data in support of the theory.  Also become aware of tests suggesting the existence of market anomalies which run counter to the notion of market efficiency., Become aware of some basic investment concepts and strategies., Become aware of some basic personal financial decisions including the use of tax-advantaged retirement accounts such 401(k)'s and IRA's, asset allocation, saving for educational expenses, insurance decisions, and ways to pass assets on to one's heirs., Become aware of current financial and economic events., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100, AEM 2210, or equivalents.

class: AEM 2350
class title: Introduction To The Economics Of Development
description: This course is intended as an introduction to the economics of low income countries. It focuses on the policies and constraints to promoting growth and development.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the nature of poverty and how it is measured., Students will be able to understand how economic growth is measured and how this correlates to alternative measures of development., Students will be able to understand the structural changes in the economy that occur as a country increases per capita income., Students will be able to understand the leading economic models explaining these changes., Students will become familiar with competing views of how economic policy can best promote economic growth and development., Students will be able to understand how linkages to the international economy can promote or hinder the process of economic growth and development., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one full semester university course in introductory economics.

class: AEM 2400
class title: Marketing
description: Provides a broad introduction to the fundamentals of marketing. Explores the components of an organization's strategic marketing program, including how to price, promote, and distribute goods and services. Industry guest lectures and current marketing applications from various companies are presented and analyzed.

class: AEM 2500
class title: Environmental and Resource Economics
description: This course uses microeconomics to understand the causes and how to devise solutions to environmental and natural resource problems. Subjects include valuation, benefit-cost analysis, policy design and property rights. The course relies on these concepts to explore major current policy issues such as economic incentives in environmental policy, air and water pollution, depletion of renewable and nonrenewable resources, and global warming. Students are evaluated based on problems sets, short essays, 3 quizzes and 3 prelims.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: AEM 2555
class title: Corporate Sustainability
description: This course provides an overview of the area of corporate sustainability, with particular emphasis on the finance industry. The focus will be on understanding how a growing recognition of the importance of sustainability affects corporate behavior. Through a combination of classroom presentations, assigned readings, in-class discussions, and individual writing assignments, students will develop critical thinking and writing skills while they learn about the most important themes in corporate sustainability.
outcome: Identify the key trends in the area of corporate sustainability, as well as the risks and opportunities that arise from a growing public awareness of the impacts of corporate activity., Recognize sustainability risks associated with particular corporate activities and will be able to propose actions that mitigate these risks., Critically examine the interactions between corporate entities and their peers, their regulators, the public, and their other stakeholders, and to recognize opportunities for improving the outcomes of these interactions., Recognize controversial issues in business ethics, will analyze the issues critically, and will convincingly articulate their personal views on the issues., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: First-Year Writing Seminar or equivalent.

class: AEM 2600
class title: Managerial Economics
description: This course covers microeconomic principles that inform managerial decisions in firms and organizations. The course will touch on how these principles apply to the Dyson School research foci of management, agribusiness, environmental sustainability, and emerging markets.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110,  MATH 1110.

class: AEM 2700
class title: Management Communication
description: Management Communication is intended to help you think strategically about communication and aid you in improving your writing, presentation, and interpersonal communication skills as a future manager. We will look at a set of "best practices" or guidelines that have been derived from both research and experience, give you the opportunity to put those guidelines into practice, and provide you with feedback on your work to help you strengthen your abilities. More often than not, we will be using a workshop format that will rely heavily on discussion and in-class exercises.
outcome: Formulate an effective communication strategy for any message, in any medium, and in any situation., Write clearly, concisely, and convincingly., Create effective presentations that are delivered with confidence and poise., Give and receive feedback that will improve yours and others' communication., Listen for understanding., Work effectively with others in small groups or teams., Identify and negotiate the difference in communication between yourself and people who are not from your culture., 
distribution categories: (ORL-AG)

class: AEM 2805
class title: Strategic Responses to Poverty and Hunger in Developing Countries
description: As a writing course, AEM 2805 provides students with an opportunity to understand the problems of poverty and hunger in
developing countries. An important focus of the course will be to explore strategies that United Nations agencies, governmental
bodies, and international non-governmental organizations employ to meet challenges of poverty and hunger.
outcome: Develop the capacity to evaluate evidence and express ideas coherently through writing., Recognize the ways in which poverty and food insecurity are distributed across the globe., Define how economic pressures (food prices, market failures, supply chain problems), natural disasters (droughts, floods) and political conflict affect poverty and food security., Identify and assess strategic orientations that various organizations use to address problems of poverty and hunger., Assess the effect of both existing risks and emerging challenges that undermine efforts to improve the well-being of populations who suffer poverty and experience food insecurity., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: First-Year Writing Seminar or equivalent.

class: AEM 2810
class title: The Economics of Vice and Corruption
description: This writing course is designed to explore the important but largely undocumented role of vice and corruption in modern economies. A particular focus of the course will be learning how to identify activities, such as corruption and creating, that are designed to avoid detection. Techniques to uncover nefarious behavior are an important tool to understand the nature and extent of bad behavior and to prescribe policy treatment to minimize it. Students will write essays reflecting critically on weekly readings of recent literature on vice and deception.
outcome: Students will have a well-developed capacity to evaluate evidence and the ability to express ideas coherently through writing., Students will be able to identify, access, and understand primary academic research from leading journals., Students will be able to illustrate how econometric tools can be used to identify the existence and scope of nefarious behavior that is intended to be hidden., Students will be able to distinguish policy prescriptions to minimize the extent of nefarious behavior., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, First-Year Writing Seminar.

class: AEM 2818
class title: Sustainable Arguments
description: In Fall of 2015 the United Nations' General Assembly adopted a resolution titled, "Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development." This 35-page resolution includes an elaborate vision statement, a list of principles and commitments, and a list of 17 goals, among many other items. In 2022, the resolution is still very much in effect and having an impact on our world. Upon analyzing or reflecting on the text of the UN resolution and exploring its related goals and topics, we can quickly begin to identify the issues people, organizations, and governments are likely to argue over, or are already arguing over. Thus, UN goal and topic is up for argument, including facts (e.g., climate change) will be contested in one way or another, by someone or some group or another, and arguments of all kinds, formal and informal, will proliferate. It is amid these arguments about our sustainable future that this course will take place. Sustainable Arguments will focus on making and understanding data driven, logical, and rhetorically focused arguments about sustainability that connect to the UN's Agenda for Sustainable Development.
outcome: Analyze, state, and arrange the structures of written and oral arguments., Generate data-driven arguments appropriate to varied contexts and situations., Explain the general history of rhetoric and argument as fields of study., Identify types of arguments and logical fallacies, and apply them effectively., Design arguments that use and follow the rules and tools of rhetoric., Construct arguments (written and oral) to specific audiences., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: First-Year Writing Seminar or equivalent.

class: AEM 2820
class title: Introduction to Database Management Systems
description: Introduces the principals and functions of relational database management systems (DBMS) and their business application. Students will explore both logical and physical database designs and develop a clear understanding of the concepts and terminology related to DBMS. A small relational database will be designed and students will learn to run SQL queries. Students will learn a set of skills to describe what happened in the past using queries, descriptive statistics, data visualization, and some data mining techniques. Excel add-ins and other DBMS software may also be employed.
outcome: Discuss database management systems and design., Explain the terminology related to database management systems., Describe the design and implementation of a database management system., Execute queries using SQL syntax., Build models to solve real-world business problems., Demonstrate knowledge of skills for supporting the decision-making process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2010.

class: AEM 2840
class title: Python Programming for Data Analysis and Business Modeling
description: This course is an introduction to programming with Python for students aiming to enter the world of business analytics. Using business applied cases students will increase decision making efficiency and productivity through a detailed understanding of Python programming languages. Students will also learn how to use a range of Python libraries for data analytics such as NumPy, MatPlotLib, Seaborn, Pandas, and Scikit.
outcome: Program Python, a strong and popular open source programming language., Develop algorithmic thinking., Utilize and understand Basic Data Structures., Utilize and understand Conditional Branching and Looping., Create functions in Python., Utilize Python libraries that can be used for business analytics., Develop skills in building models to solve real-world business problems., Produce a Python solution for a business application., 

class: AEM 3000
class title: Working Together: Project Development and High-Performing Teams
description: Part of the Grand Challenges program, the Pre-Project Immersion prepares students to work with a team during their senior year to solve a societal problem. The Immersion is an intensive learning experience with reinforcements throughout the semester. Students will build skills in working as part of a team, presenting to a client, reflecting on their experience, and demonstrating cultural humility.
outcome: Work collaboratively with a team to practice managing a project., Use design thinking strategies to understand a problem and navigate uncertainty and complexity., Practice consulting skills, such as listening and engaging with community partners., Develop a communication strategy and demonstrate clear writing and effective presentation skills., Reflect on your views and experiences to improve self-awareness., Identify personal biases and understand how reframing and cultural humility may improve team and community outcomes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of Grand Challenges writing requirement or permission of instructor.

class: AEM 3005
class title: Skills and Strategies for Executive Management
description: This class is designed for 3rd and 4th year students in the Dyson School. The class will be open to students in other majors depending on available space. The class will describe some of the key strategies and skills required to be an executive manager/CEO/owner of a company. The course will also detail the executive challenges of starting your own company.
outcome: Identify situations of conflict and respond appropriately., Assess company and asset valuations., Make capital allocation decisions., Describe what actions are necessary to create and manage a start-up company., 

class: AEM 3020
class title: Farm Business Management
description: Intensive study of planning, directing, organizing, and controlling a farm business, with emphasis on the tools of managerial analysis and decision making. Topics include financial statements, business analysis, budgeting, and acquisition, organization, and management of capital, labor, land, buildings, and machinery.

class: AEM 3050
class title: Negotiation Strategies and Skills
description: Negotiation is the art and science of securing agreements between two or more interdependent parties. To reach agreements, it is necessary to understand the behavior and relationships of individuals, groups and organizations in the context of cooperative and competitive situations. This course is designed to help you build a negotiation skillset that can be used in a broad set of organizational situations, as well as in your personal life. A basic premise of the course is that while you need analytic skills to discover or create optimal solutions to problems, you need a broader array of skills for these solutions to be accepted and implemented. During the course, you will develop these skills experientially and learn to apply relevant analytic frameworks.
outcome: Analyze diverse negotiation scenarios and identify their distributive, collaborative, and integrative elements., Improve your negotiation outcomes by preparing effectively and recognizing when you should walk away from a potential deal., Identify your counterparty's hardball negotiation strategies and defuse or counteract them., Negotiate effectively as part of a team., Create win-win (integrative) solutions that maximize the potential value of a deal., 

class: AEM 3115
class title: Evaluation of Green Energy Strategies and Markets
description: After an overview of the trends in renewable energy and the multitude of public policies and private initiatives, a conceptual framework to analyze the social costs and benefits will be developed and each policy compared in terms of achieving social goals. The perverse effects of combining policies like subsidies and mandates at both the state and federal levels will be emphasized, along with the interaction of renewable policies with regional cap and trade regimes, and regulations like fuel economy standards and EPA environmental regulations. The specific economic and technology issues facing renewable electricity versus biofuel markets will be addressed, providing students a detailed understanding of each market and the effects of public policies. The effects of biofuel policies on food commodity prices will be emphasized.
outcome: Analyze how the renewable energy industry got started, the technological and economic challenges it faces and the consequences of government policies., Assess how well the broad spectrum of policies achieve GHGE reductions., Identify the many perverse and contradictory effects of such policies as mandates, subsidies, import barriers, sustainability standards and indirect land use measures., Explain how to revise current policies and recommend alternatives to best achieve a carbon neutral economy using renewable energy., Detail how biofuel policies were the major driver of the tripling of grains/oilseed prices in 2008 and 2011 and to high food commodity prices to this day., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: AEM 3200
class title: Business Law
description: Examines legal problems of particular interest to persons who expect to engage in business. Emphasizes the law of contracts, sales, agency, and property.
outcome: Attain analytical and functional competency in business skills., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply to real world settings., Demonstrate ability to recognize legal issues in business and propose ways to solve problems that are effective given the governing legal rules., Demonstrate ability to solve practical business problems and make an impact in real world and society., 

class: AEM 3205
class title: Ethics in Business and Organizations
description: This course will survey ethical problems that arise in business and other organizational contexts, and develop theoretical resources
to help address them.
outcome: Identify and define central ethical problems in business., Distinguish major ethical theories and how they my illuminate the central ethical problems in business., Recognize and define psychological processes that influence moral and organizational behavior., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2200 or equivalent.

class: AEM 3220
class title: Digital Business Strategy
description: As digital innovations revolutionize industries, many companies struggle to figure out the changing terms of competition. We will examine earlier digital transformations of industries such as books, music, software, telecommunications, and newspapers to assess the potential impact of Internet of Things, 5G networks, and the fourth industrial revolution. Students will critically evaluate the nature of data and information as economic goods; the role of communication networks in the economy; the industrial impact of digitization, including data, analytics, and AI; the platformization of markets; and new business models and business opportunities.
outcome: Students use analytical frameworks to craft digital business models and facilitate organizational design., Students assess the effects of technological and societal change on competition in digital markets., Students develop strategies for capturing economic benefits from innovation opportunities., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2200 or ECON 1110.

class: AEM 3245
class title: Organizational Behavior
description: This course examines evidence-based principles of individual and group behavior in relation to leadership and management. Topics include the nature and design of groups, the factors that improve team performance, and the importance of skills including dispute resolution, persuasion, and negotiations, assignments provide opportunities for the engagement and application of analytical skills relating to real-world organizations.
outcome: Students will be able to juxtapose and consider organizational dynamics that involve individuals and groups across a wide array of model domains., Students will closely and directly engage an array of research/analytic methodologies that have applicability across industries., Students will leverage lessons that are available from their past organizational experiences for the purposes of leadership development as well as organizational analysis and management., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 1200 or AEM 2200 or equivalent.

class: AEM 3249
class title: Entrepreneurial Marketing and Strategy
description: The course is focused on the tools and frameworks that assist a startup entrepreneur in exploring the feasibility of a new idea. After establishing an understanding of the funding process for new ventures, students will learn about and practice market research techniques involving both formal (in person interviews) and informal (expert interviews, social media) ways to understand the adoption behavior and urgent needs/wants of prospective customers. In addition, participants will learn how to take findings from market research to formulate business models and strategies.
outcome: After doing the project, students will be able to use formal (in person interviews) and informal (expert conversations, social media) methods to understand the adoption behavior and urgent needs/wants of prospective customers., After completing the course project, students will be able to take findings from market research to formulate business models and strategies., At the end of the project, students will be able to use the Lean Startup principles to analyze a new opportunity by identifying the problem/solution fit and the product/market fit., At the end of the course, students will be able to create an effective written and oral investor pitch for a new business opportunity., 

class: AEM 3255
class title: Creativity Sprint: An Entrepreneurship Hackathon
description: The ability to shepherd an idea from ideation to development to implementation is an essential skill in today's business environment for entrepreneurs, innovators, and organizational change agents. To this end, this course aims to develop students' abilities to identify problems and generate solutions to real world business and societal challenges. The course focuses on problem identification (understanding the core elements of a presenting problem), idea generation (developing solutions to those problems), and implementation (putting those solutions into practice). The course includes lecture-based content and activities around these topics and features participation in a weekend-long hackathon event that serves as a practicum experience where students will generate, develop, and pitch an idea related to a societal or business challenge.
outcome: Identify real problems (a.k.a., pain points)., Effectively ideate creative solutions, including thinking through the idea's feasability, viability, and novelty., Recognize how technologies and solutions from one industry can be adapted to solve teh pain points of another industry., 

class: AEM 3270
class title: Supply Chain Strategy and Supermarket Simulation
description: In Wisconsin and Ohio, farmers are dumping thousands of gallons of fresh milk into ponds and manure pits. In California, farmers are plowing under thousands of acres of lettuce and perfectly ripe strawberries. Months after concerns about shortages in grocery stores shoppers are still scrambling to find the last box of pasta or roll of toilet paper. It is Cyber Monday every day at retailers like Amazon.com, Walmart, Target, and Kroger as they struggle to meet the surge in demand. Could CoVID-19 be the black swan event that finally forces many companies, and entire industries, to rethink and transform their global supply chain model?
outcome: Students will be able to describe supply chain (network) components, processes, objectives, drivers and performance metrics., Students will be able to discuss why SCM concepts are relevant to other business functional areas., Students will undertake basis analyses of sourcing and purchasing of raw materials or finished goods for re-sale., Students will be able to apply basic demand forecasting tools as one component of demand planning (demand management) to support decision-making in supply chains, and to evaluate forecast information provided to you by others., Students will be able to develop and interpret basic Sales & Operations Plans (Aggregate Plans) used to determine production schedules in many organizations., Students will develop and interpret basic business process analyses and related diagrams and use them for SCM process improvement., Students will be able to describe lean manufacturing and sustainability issues and their importance in supply chains., 

class: AEM 3310
class title: Introduction to Business Regulation
description: The purpose of this course is to help and guide business and policy students in understanding and recognizing the multiple motivations of society to control certain business activities, the several general approaches to regulation and what is understood of the outcomes, and to provide an appreciation through case studies of how different sectors manage in a regulated environment. The treatment is to include an evaluation of the concept of 'regulatory risk', the uncertainly about regulatory outcomes/changes which constitute a risk, the major risk in some industries, so that understanding and managing that risk is a significant aspect of profitability for many firms, and a consideration for policy makers. Specific emphasis will be placed on the healthcare, biotechnology, energy, and technology business sectors.
outcome: Evaluate and articulate the reasons for business regulation., Extract pertinent information from the case studies and synthesize justifications for the need and reasoning behind certain regulations., Determine and articulate the difference between "good" vs. "bad" regulations., Create their own specific industry regulations to benefit the industries involved and society as a whole., Apply game theory and other analytical models to predict the effects of current and new regulations on business sectors., Create management scenarios to conform with new regulations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or AEM 2200, or equivalent.

class: AEM 3320
class title: Leadership and Management in Sports
description: This course draws upon the study of sports for the purpose of understanding and studying evidence-based principles of individual and organizational behavior. Topics include the nature of motivation, momentum, and coaching as well as the challenges of talent identification, team-level coordination, and strategy development. Assignments provide opportunities for the development and application of analytic skills relating to leadership and management.
outcome: Students will be able to consider and juxtapose organizational dynamics that involve individuals and teams across and beyond the domain of sports., Students will closely and directly engage an array of research/analytic methodologies that applicability inside and outside of sports-focused organizations., Students will leverage lessons that are available from the study of sports for the purposes of leadership development as well as organizational analysis and management., 

class: AEM 3360
class title: Corporate Financial Reporting I
description: AEM 3360 is the first of a series of two courses in intermediate accounting. This is a one-semester course for students in the accounting and finance concentrations. This course is an important prerequisite for students intending to pursue a graduate degree in accounting. The course focuses on 1) the accounting process, 2) the conceptual framework underlying financial accounting, 3) the primary financial statements, and 4) the measurement and reporting of assets, liabilities, and shareholders' equity. Specific topics include an overview of generally accepted accounting principles, financial statements and ratios, cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventories, operating assets, current and long-term liabilities, and stockholders' equity.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2225.

class: AEM 3385
class title: Social Entrepreneurship Practicum: Anabel's Grocery
description: AEM 3385 is a hands-on learning experience that serves as an entry point for new Anabel's Grocery team members, introducing them to social entrepreneurship, food justice, systems thinking, collaborative leadership practices, and the day-to-day operations of Anabel's. No prerequisites and no previous experience with Anabel's required. The course is open to students regardless of major. We are looking for students with diverse interests who are passionate about making healthy food accessible to everyone through practical actions that further racial, economic, and ecological justice. This experiential-based course meets once a week. It includes small group discussion sessions and a practicum commitment of about 4 hours per week.
outcome: Analyze the systemic forces of capitalism and racism that give rise to ongoing inequities in our food system., Gain hands-on experience implementing a food justice social enterprise; understand and apply systems thinking to evaluate and solve problems; use an antiracist lens to consider and evaluate norms, practices and policies., Explore how choices, norms, and policies that center human well-being and that of the planet can create an ecologically sound and socially just market economy and food system., Understand the UN SDGs within the limits of planetary boundaries., Engage with others in honest, reflective dialogue., Cultivate trusting, caring relationships as a foundation for collaborative action and decision making., Become confident in yourself and others to bring about meaningful change towards a more just world., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: AEM 3557
class title: Exceptionalism Questioned: America and Europe
description: Do you want to learn the discussion-based case method as taught at the Harvard Business School? Do you want to learn how to write a long research paper? Do you not want to take a final examination? If so this course may be for you. Since the beginning of the republic, American intellectuals, politicians and businessmen have extolled the exceptionalism of America. In a world of diverse forms of capitalism, can this view be sustained? Is America a shining city on the hill or a darkened city in the valley? Comparison is an effective way to discern and assess what is unique and what is general in the distinctive form of America's capitalist democracy. In this course the liberal market economy of the United States with its distinctive strengths and weaknesses is put side-by-side with different forms of liberal, corporatist and statist market economies that characterize different European countries in the emerging European polity. The diversity of capitalism points to one overarching conclusion: all of these countries are arguably capitalist, democratic market economies belonging to "the West;" and each of them has distinctive strengths and weaknesses. Like all other countries, America is ordinary in mobilizing its formidable capacities and displaying its glaring weaknesses as it copes with change. 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AEM 4000
class title: Grand Challenges Project
description: Part of the Grand Challenges program, the Project Course is a capstone, team-based learning experience. Students work with a faculty member and a client or community partner to tackle a societal problem. Projects span the entire semester and, for larger projects, may extend to student cohorts over several semesters.
outcome: Demonstrate client engagement skills in interactions with a community partner., Work collaboratively with a team to manage a project and produce deliverables that meet or exceed the partner's expectations., Reflect on individual and team learning to manage through conflict, uncertainty, and successes and failures., Translate your learning into stories and plans for future community engagement., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Grand Challenges writing course and AEM 3000.

class: AEM 4001
class title: Grand Challenges Abroad I

class: AEM 4110
class title: Introduction to Econometrics
description: This course is an introduction to basic econometric principles and the use of statistical techniques to estimate empirical economic models. Multiple regression is introduced and procedures to accommodate data issues and limitations are presented. Topics discussed include simultaneous equations, panel models and limited dependent variable models. Time series approaches are introduced. Students are required to estimate econometric models using provided data sets.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100, AEM 2600 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4210
class title: Futures, Options and Financial Derivatives
description: Covers the pricing of derivatives and how derivatives can be used for the purpose of risk management and speculation. A portion of this course involves the use of spreadsheet or other computer programs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100 and AEM 2240, or equivalent.

class: AEM 4225
class title: Systems and Analytics in Accounting
description: An investigation of the systems and software that capture and store accounting and economic information, and of the tools and techniques that support a robust use of that data for the benefit of individual enterprises and greater society. Topics include "Big Data", Data Visualization, Optimization Tools and Accounting Support Systems and Databases. Students taking this course at the graduate level will have a semester project related to the extension of the utility of large data sets beyond their initial purposes.
outcome: Gain and demonstrate an understanding of the Systems and Software that support the financial functions of modern and complex business enterprises., Engage these systems in support of the array of decisions that internal and external accountants encounter in the practice of their discipline., Investigate and develop the analytical tools that support the use of "Big Data" to address questions that reach beyond the boundaries of individual enterprises., Further explore the ethical framework within which accounting and assurance professionals and academics employ their skills, and discuss the risks of working with Big Data and the safeguards that are available to address those risks., Refine the cooperative work and leadership skills that are critical to success in this field through the completion of high quality analysis and casework in analytical teams., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2210 or AEM 2225, AEM 2100.

class: AEM 4230
class title: Behavioral Finance
description: The traditional framework for thinking about financial markets assumes that all market participants are fully rational. The past four decades have seen the emergence of an important new paradigm, behavioral finance, which argues that many financial phenomena are the result of less than fully rational thinking and which draws on psychology to understand the ways in which people are not fully rational. This course provides an introduction to the field. We revisit basic topics in finance from a behavioral finance perspective: topics related to markets (stock market fluctuations, popular investment strategies, bubbles); topics related to investor behavior (poor investment decisions by households); and topics related to corporate finance (security issuance, mergers and acquisitions). A running theme in the course is that knowledge of behavioral finance is essential for anyone who seeks a full understanding of modern financial markets.
outcome: Develop effective communication skills., Attain analytic and functional competency in the basic business and economic skills., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply real world settings., Develop skills to be critical consumers of business and economic information and research., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2240 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4400
class title: Retail Strategy
description: This course explores the strategies and analytical techniques employed to address both classical and contemporary problems faced by retailers. Case study analysis provides a principal pedagogical approach. Cases come from a broad spectrum of retailing sectors: food, mass, fashion, on-line, international. Project required. Selected retail executives will participate.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2420 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4415
class title: Field Research and Pre-Engagement with Social Enterprises in Emerging Markets
description: This course prepares students for engaged-learning opportunities that include working with diverse community partners e.g., small and medium enterprises [organizations], NGOs, universities, and public agencies in emerging markets. This course comprises two sections: 1. Field research methods, which provide students with a strong theoretical grounding on how to collect and report primary data in publishable works (e.g., case studies). 2. Development of field safety, research protocols and client pre-engagement opportunities for students who have successfully been selected to participate in the Student Multidisciplinary Applied Research Teams (SMART) projects. For information on SMART, visit the Student Multidisciplinary Applied Research Teams (SMART) Program website.
outcome: Describe the legal and ethical considerations for research dealing with human participants., Identify global trends and issues that might promote social, economic, technological, and policy development within resource-poor counties, organizations, and communities., Identify and employ various resources that will promote meaningful cross-cultural and multidisciplinary communication, learning, and working to solve an applied business problem., Apply, use, and synthesize multiple environmental scanning frameworks in analyzing the macro and micro-environments of social enterprises in emerging markets., 

class: AEM 4420
class title: Emerging Markets
description: Provides a framework for examining the effectiveness of marketing strategies in economies in transition and identifying the challenges and opportunities for firms in low-income economies to access industrial markets. Appraises the risk of entering markets in low-income economies and assesses the political, legal, cultural, and economic forces. Analyzes and discusses case studies of companies.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2420 and PUBPOL 2000, or ECON 3030, or AEM 2600.

class: AEM 4435
class title: Data Driven Marketing
description: This course deals with the use of data to make marketing decisions. It introduces concepts, methods, and applications of analytics to products, markets, and marketing actions. Unlike marketing courses that focus on conceptual material, this course will provide skills to translate conceptual understanding into specific operational plans – a skill in increasing demand in organizations today.
outcome: Develop appreciation for the value of evidence-based decision making in marketing., Use the vocabulary of marketing analytics., Develop and apply common analytical tools in marketing., Utilize the findings from analytical models to improve marketing decisions in business situations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100, AEM 2420, AEM 2010, or equivalent.

class: AEM 4450
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: AEM 4460
class title: Food Marketing Fellows
description: The course focuses on current topics in food marketing and may be supplemented by field trips to food industry firms and other exposure to food industry activities and practitioners. In addition, the course includes preparation for a field study trip during the winter break period.
outcome: Maximize benefits gained from Food Fellows International Study Trip., Broaden understanding of world food system., Gain perspective about culture and consumer behaviors outside of the U.S., Cultivate interest in the food industry as a career option., 

class: AEM 4485
class title: Economics of Food and Malnutrition
description: This course focused on the economics of food and malnutrition from the perspective of individuals and households; that is, a micro-economic approach. Topics include characteristics and constraints associated with food production in both developed and developing countries; the determinants of household food security; the social and economic causes and consequences of undernutrition; the social and economic causes and consequences of obesity; intervention design to reduce food insecurity, undernutrition and obesity.
outcome: Ability to analyze problems of food security and nutrition using perspectives and tools drawn from both economics and nutrition; critically assess studies of the determinants of these; understand the strengths and limitations of interventions designed to ameliorate these., Integrate knowledge from the biological and social sciences to address nutrition problems facing individuals, societies and governments., Ability to understand and analyze quantitative data on food security and nutrition., Ability to access and critically evaluate scientific information from the primary research literature to investigate the causal effects of nutrition., Motivation to engage in debates surrounding the design and implementation of innovative solutions to current existing and future problems related to food, hunger, and nutrition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, AEM 2100, or equivalent, and nine additional credits in economics, applied economics, or nutrition.

class: AEM 4490
class title: Financial Markets and Sustainability
description: This course provides a broad overview of the financial markets, including the structure and function of these markets, the financial products that are transacted on them, and the institutions that operate within them, while addressing how financial markets are evolving in response to the challenges of sustainability. Through the use of case studies, lectures, readings, and project work, students learn how the leading actors in the financial services industry operate, what motivates them, and how they facilitate the flow of capital between those who can provide financing and those who need it. In parallel with this, the course explores how the tools of finance can be used to generate social and environmental returns in addition to financial returns.
outcome: Describe the structure of the financial markets, explain the role of key market actors, and discuss the attributes of the main products and services transacted on the financial markets., Recognize and assess the negative externalities likely to result from particular financial transactions., Illustrate how financial products and services are utilized by sustainable finance practitioners to generate social and environmental co-benefits such as ecosystem conservation, poverty reduction, and improved education., Evaluate proposed sustainable finance transactions and weigh their potential to generate both financial returns and nonfinancial returns., Identify sources of unused natural or social capital and propose strategies to unlock cash flows currently locked within such sources., 

class: AEM 4520
class title: Advanced Accounting
description: Detailed analytical study of special issues and situations in financial accounting. Continuous emphasis is placed on the relationship between theory and practice to reflect the latest professional pronouncements. Highly technical topics related to corporation, partnership, government, and not-for-profit organizations, with a focus on business combinations and the particular accounting challenges that they present.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 3360.

class: AEM 4530
class title: Auditing and Assurance
description: Theory and practice of independent examination of financial statements. Discussion of relationships with clients; working papers, assurance procedures, including evaluations of internal controls, accounting principles, risk assessment, liability, and professional ethics.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 3360.

class: AEM 4531
class title: Federal Income Taxation
description: Introductory course in federal income taxation covering structure of present tax law; basis for income tax computations; concepts of gross income, adjusted gross income, deductions, exemptions and credits. The emphasis is on tax questions and problems relating to individuals. Students enrolled in the graduate-level section will be required to do additional tax problems.
outcome: Explore the tax environment, fundamentals of tax planning, measurement of taxable income, taxation of business entities (individuals, corporations and partnerships) and tax compliance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2225 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4533
class title: Federal Income Taxation of Low Income Taxpayers
description: This course covers the present structure of tax law in the United States, including the measurement of taxable income, tax compliance fundamentals, and other related Federal and state tax issues facing low-income taxpayers, with some emphasis on immigrant taxpayers. Participants also discuss various tax research and compliance tools that may be used by practitioners and/or volunteer low-income taxpayer assistance programs. Guest lecturers will focus on specific topics such as the rules surrounding ITIN preparation and other tax issues unique to low-income taxpayers.
outcome: Develop effective communication skills when dealing with low-income taxpayers, including immigrant taxpayers., Attain analytical and functional competency in various areas of Federal and state tax law., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply to real-world settings., Demonstrate the ability to solve practical tax problems that surround low-income taxpayers., Develop skills to be critical consumers of tax information and research., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2225 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4545
class title: Money and Finance in the Digital Age
description: This course will provide an overview of new financial technologies (Fintech), cryptocurrencies, central bank digital currencies, and decentralized finance (DeFi). The implications of these novel technologies for the future of financial markets, central banking, and international finance will be examined. The course will also cover basic analytical models in open economy macroeconomics and international finance, focusing on capital flows and exchange rate dynamics.
outcome: Demonstrate ability to formulate a research topic, conduct independent quantitative research, and write a substantive research paper., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3040 and ECON 3120 or ECON 3140 or equivalent.

class: AEM 4570
class title: Corporate Finance
description: This course is designed to advance the understanding of corporate financial decision making. The class will further the corporate finance topics taught in AEM 2240 such cost of capital, capital structure, mergers and acquisitions, and dividend policy. Some topics in international corporate finance topics will also be discussed.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2240.

class: AEM 4585
class title: Sustainable Business
description: This course provides a survey of the rapidly evolving area of corporate sustainability for graduate students and advanced undergraduates. The focus of the course will be on understanding the ways in which growing concerns about human health and wellbeing and the environment may (or may not) affect corporate behavior. Through a combination of classroom presentations, discussion of case studies, assigned readings, and independent research, students will learn about the most important themes in corporate sustainability, including environmental and social risk management, sustainability initiatives and self-regulation in the corporate sector, stakeholder engagement and management, and the growth of sustainable finance and business, including green entrepreneurship and ESG investing.
outcome: Identify the key trends in the broad field of corporate sustainability and the risks and opportunities that arise from a growing public awareness of the environmental, social, and other impacts of corporate activity., Recognize sustainability risks associated with particular corporate activities and will be able to propose actions that mitigate these risks., Examine the interactions between corporate entities and their competitors, regulators, the public, and their other stakeholders, and to put forward recommendations on how to improve the outcomes of these interactions., Identify opportunities and propose ways in which the tools of finance can be leveraged to better manage natural resources and reach desirable social objectives., 

class: AEM 4655
class title: Applied Corporate and Competitive Strategy
description: This course is designed to deepen your problem solving, critical thinking, and business acumen by exploring a range of high-stakes business scenarios, engaging with industry professionals, and conducting original research. In addition, this course will sharpen your ability to communicate effectively with senior stakeholders. Although the mindsets, behaviors, and skills taught in this course are useful in a range of contexts, this course will be particularly useful if you are entering a career in management consulting, corporate strategy, general management, marketing, or private equity.
outcome: Investigate a problem facing an organization by recognizing the problem, describing the impact on the business, and diagnosing the sub-issues contributing to the challenge., Select and apply a range of qualitative and quantitative analytical tools to formulate and evaluate strategic options., Synthesize insights from research and analyses to recommend a resolution to an ongoing business challenge., Argue in favor of your ideas, both verbally and in writing, and do so with increased effectiveness, confidence, and humility., Describe an important event or organization in business history, identify key actions taken (or not taken) by management, and articulate lessons learned for future decision-makers., 

class: AEM 4660
class title: Business Simulation
description: Course is required for completing the Dyson Business Minor for Engineers, but is open to all majors. By participating in a business simulation, students get experience applying key business principles, such as finance, accounting, marketing, economics and management in dynamic marketing settings. Participants make team-based and individual decisions based on imperfect information and aggressive time constraints. Through analysis, coaching and facilitation, the experience leads to learning the ways specific business decisions influence firm performance in a dynamic marketplace.
outcome: Providing practice for decision-making under uncertainty., Understanding competitive markets and landscapes., Working in diverse teams under time pressure., Applying core business principles to a practical setting., Integrating theory with practice in terms of business management education., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2210, AEM 2225, or equivalent. Corequisite: AEM 2240, AEM 2241, or equivalent.

class: AEM 4665
class title: Business Management Simulation
description: The Business Management Simulation (BMS) is a course in which each student works as part of a team to manage a simulated manufacturing company. Each team is responsible for making yearly decisions in four broad areas: sales, marketing, operations, and finance. Depending on class size, there will be one or two different industries, each operating in its own competitive space, and there will be four or five companies in each industry. Your competition, therefore, is limited to the other three or four teams in your industry. You will all start in the same position, competing with one another to gain market share, generate revenue, and increase profitability. Performance is measured by the relative success of each firm in creating shareholder value by paying dividends and increasing share price.
outcome: Students will be able to develop and implement a successful long-term business strategy., Students will be able to examine market dynamics and industry evolution., Students will be able to collaborate effectively across functions., Students will be able to allocate resources to meet strategic and operational goals., Students will be able to develop effective team processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2225, AEM 2240, or equivalent.

class: AEM 4670
class title: Investments
description: This course discusses a wide range of investments-related topics, both conceptually and analytically. We first study basic frameworks that provide investors guidance on how to value securities and make investment decisions; topics include basic concepts of return, risk, and prices, asset allocations, the capital asset pricing model, and performance evaluation. We then study empirical patterns of asset prices and discuss the implications of these patterns for investors' trading strategies; here, we introduce the important concept of market efficiency. Next, we discuss bond market investing and the yield curve, as well as derivative contracts such as futures and options. Finally, we discuss selected topics in behavioral finance, an active subfield within finance that tries to improve our understanding of financial markets and investor behavior using frameworks that are psychologically realistic; here, topics include a set of systematic mistakes real-world investors make, the underlying mechanisms that cause these mistakes, and ways to improve financial decision making.
outcome: Course will deepen the students' understanding of the core principles behind investment and Portfolio Management., Offers focus on the theoretical foundations of asset prices, with particular focus on the largest asset classes: Bonds, Equities, and Derivatives (Options)., Students will be able to manage portfolios across asset classes, and learn how assets are priced either through no arbitrage arguments or general equilibrium price theory., Students will learn how these concepts are extended in an international framework, and how macroeconomic and global factors can affect investment decisions and asset prices., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2240.

class: AEM 4880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability,climate change, and economic development in the US, China, India, and other countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers ., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: AEM 4940
class title: Undergraduate Special Topics in Applied Economics and Management
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the beginning of the semester.

class: AEM 4961
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: AEM 4970
class title: Individual Study in Applied Economics and Management
description: Used for special projects designed by faculty members.

class: AEM 4980
class title: Supervised Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduates experience through actual involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of department faculty. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of preparation and teaching.

class: AEM 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Permits outstanding undergraduates to carry out independent study of suitable problems under appropriate supervision. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of work.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: AEM 4992
class title: Undergraduate Accounting and Tax Research
description: Permits outstanding undergraduates to carry out independent study of suitable problems under appropriate supervision. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of work. This course meets one of the educational components of the New York state CPA exam.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: AEM 5111
class title: Introduction to Econometrics
description: The course objective is to provide students with a solid introductory understanding of econometric theory and applications. Students completing this course willbe able to integrate economic theory with econometric methods to solve research problems ineconomics, business, finance or other social sciences. The course covers least squares estimation, inference, forecasting,and various estimation problems and topicsin econometrics. The course emphasizes application rather than theory, although proper application requires knowledge of the underlying theory.

class: AEM 5115
class title: Evaluation of Green Energy Strategies and Markets
description: After an overview of the trends in renewable energy and the multitude of public policies and private initiatives, a conceptual framework to analyze the social costs and benefits will be developed and each policy compared in terms of achieving social goals. The perverse effects of combining policies like subsidies and mandates at both the state and federal levels will be emphasized, along with the interaction of renewable policies with regional cap and trade regimes, and regulations like fuel economy standards and EPA environmental regulations. The specific economic and technology issues facing renewable electricity versus biofuel markets will be addressed, providing students a detailed understanding of each market and the effects of public policies. The effects of biofuel policies on food commodity prices will be emphasized.
outcome: Analyze how the renewable energy industry got started, the technological and economic challenges it faces and the consequences of government policies., Assess how well the broad spectrum of policies achieve GHGE reductions., Identify the many perverse and contradictory effects of such policies as mandates, subsidies, import barriers, sustainability standards and indirect land use measures., Explain how to revise current policies and recommend alternatives to best achieve a carbon neutral economy using renewable energy., Detail how biofuel policies were the major driver of the tripling of grains/oilseed prices in 2008 and 2011 and to high food commodity prices to this day., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: AEM 5220
class title: Digital Business Strategy
description: As digital innovations revolutionize industries, many companies struggle to figure out the changing terms of competition. We will examine earlier digital transformations of industries such as books, music, software, telecommunications, and newspapers to assess the potential impact of Internet of Things, 5G networks, and the fourth industrial revolution. Students will critically evaluate the nature of data and information as economic goods; the role of communication networks in the economy; the industrial impact of digitization, including data, analytics, and AI; the platformization of markets; and new business models and business opportunities.
outcome: Students will be able to use analytical frameworks to craft digital business models and facilitate organizational design., Students will be able to assess the effects of technological and societal change on competition in digital markets., Students will be able to develop strategies for capturing economic benefits from innovation opportunities., 

class: AEM 5225
class title: Systems and Analytics in Accounting
description: An investigation of the systems and software that capture and store accounting and economic information, and of the tools and techniques that support a robust use of that data for the benefit of individual enterprises and greater society. Topics include "Big Data", Data Visualization, Optimization Tools and Accounting Support Systems and Databases. Students taking this course at the graduate level will have a semester project related to the extension of the utility of large data sets beyond their initial purposes.
outcome: Gain and demonstrate an understanding of the Systems and Software that support the financial functions of modern and complex business enterprises., Engage these systems in support of the array of decisions that internal and external accountants encounter in the practice of their discipline., Investigate and develop the analytical tools that support the use of "Big Data" to address questions that reach beyond the boundaries of individual enterprises., Further explore the ethical framework within which accounting and assurance professionals and academics employ their skills, and discuss the risks of working with Big Data and the safeguards that are available to address those risks., Refine the cooperative work and leadership skills that are critical to success in this field through the completion of high quality analysis and casework in analytical teams., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2210 or AEM 2225, AEM 2100.

class: AEM 5230
class title: Behavioral Finance
description: The traditional framework for thinking about financial markets assumes that all market participants are fully rational. The past four decades have seen the emergence of an important new paradigm, behavioral finance, which argues that many financial phenomena are the result of less than fully rational thinking and which draws on psychology to understand the ways in which people are not fully rational. This course provides an introduction to the field. We revisit basic topics in finance from a behavioral finance perspective: topics related to markets (stock market fluctuations, popular investment strategies, bubbles); topics related to investor behavior (poor investment decisions by households); and topics related to corporate finance (security issuance, mergers and acquisitions). A running theme in the course is that knowledge of behavioral finance is essential for anyone who seeks a full understanding of modern financial markets.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2240 or equivalent.

class: AEM 5270
class title: Supply Chain Strategy and Supermarket Simulation
description: In Wisconsin and Ohio, farmers are dumping thousands of gallons of fresh milk into ponds and manure pits. In California, farmers are plowing under thousands of acres of lettuce and perfectly ripe strawberries. Months after concerns about shortages in grocery stores shoppers are still scrambling to find the last box of pasta or roll of toilet paper. It is Cyber Monday every day at retailers like Amazon.com, Walmart, Target, and Kroger as they struggle to meet the surge in demand. Could CoVID-19 be the black swan event that finally forces many companies, and entire industries, to rethink and transform their global supply chain model?
outcome: Students will be able to describe supply chain (network) components, processes, objectives, drivers and performance metrics., Students will be able to discuss why SCM concepts are relevant to other business functional areas., Students will undertake basis analyses of sourcing and purchasing of raw materials or finished goods for re-sale., Students will be able to apply basic demand forecasting tools as one component of demand planning (demand management) to support decision-making in supply chains, and to evaluate forecast information provided to you by others., Students will be able to develop and interpret basic Sales & Operations Plans (Aggregate Plans) used to determine production schedules in many organizations., Students will develop and interpret basic business process analyses and related diagrams and use them for SCM process improvement., Students will be able to describe lean manufacturing and sustainability issues and their importance in supply chains., 

class: AEM 5300
class title: CEMS Block Seminar
description: Intensive, one-week, full-time immersion course in the area of sustainable business and finance, combining lectures, case study discussions, guest lectures, and team and individual exercises and presentations on the topic.
outcome: Students will recognize sustainability risks associated with particular corporate activities and will be able to propose actions that mitigate these risks., Students will identify broadly how sustainability is understood across cultures, geographies, and income levels, and how that may impact decision-making in an international business organization., Students will critically examine the interactions between corporate entities and their peers, regulators, the public, and their other stakeholders, and recognize situations in which business decisions informed by responsible citizenship may improve the outcomes of these interactions for all parties., Students will identify, reflect on, and critically analyze social and environmental challenges in which the tools of finance may be successfully leveraged to improve both economic and sustainability outcomes., 

class: AEM 5305
class title: Global Citizenship Seminar
description: Through this two-day immersion seminar as part of the broader CEMS curriculum, students will learn and gain skills related to participating in (and leading) teams of diverse individuals. The seminar-and our classroom time-will be approached as a partnership. Questions will be posed regularly and frequently throughout the course to support learning from each other. The main themes for the two-day sessions are: What is leadership? How do organizations (mis)identify leaders? What is the difference between ascribed and achieved leadership? What are the benefits of teamwork (and why is it increasing in the workplace? How do effective teams operate? What skills are most helpful for successful team participation?
outcome: Students will recognize how leadership and perceptions of leadership can impact organizations in both helpful and unhelpful ways., Students will gain an appreciation for the skills and approaches that have been demonstrated to be most effective among successful teams., Students will learn how to juxtapose lessons about how to lead in contemporary organizational settings alongside exemplars of leadership in pre-industrial communities., Students will engage with the "backstage" of academic debates and learn how to process original scientific literature., 

class: AEM 5310
class title: Global Strategy
description: This course analyzes the international business environment, defined as the economic, political, and social factors that shape firms' global strategies. We seek to explain the ways in which - and the reasons why - countries differ in policies and institutions relevant to the firm. The course places special emphasis on the political and institutional economy facing the business, which means we study how international and domestic politics as well as institutions influence continuity and change in the rules governing international economic transactions.
outcome: Students will be able to identify opportunity and risk in the global business environment with the use of theory and evidence., Students will be able to analyze how political, institutional, and social forces influence economic and regulatory outcomes relevant to business., Students will be able to develop a framework for explaining continuity and change in the international business environment., Students will be able to examine the potential future directions of international business both globally and in terms of particular market areas., 

class: AEM 5320
class title: CEMS Seminar Series
description: This course, designed for those poised to embark on their professional journeys, offers an exploration into the intersections of career development, decision-making, and dimensions of leadership pertaining to teams and dynamic environments. Over the span of seven intensive three-hour sessions, students will engage in a combination of discussions and group activities that foster collaborative learning and holistic personal growth. The curriculum covers a diverse range of topics, from aligning individual passions with career trajectories to delving into dynamic management considerations (such as those involving adaptation and emergent strategies). By its conclusion, participants will have acquired a broader worldview and a set of practical tools to effectively navigate the complexities of both their career and personal endeavors in dynamic situations.
outcome: Identify their personal interests and values and understand how they align with various career paths., Apply critical thinking and evidence-based decision-making skills in analyzing case studies., Analyze different decision-making processes and compare their effectiveness in various real-world scenarios., Evaluate and critique different leadership and management styles, especially in dynamic and crisis situations, to determine their effectiveness., Develop ideas in class that demonstrate effective team dynamics and collaborative learning., 

class: AEM 5415
class title: Field Research and Pre-Engagement with Social Enterprises in Emerging Markets
description: This course prepares students for engaged-learning opportunities that include working with diverse community partners e.g., small and medium enterprises [organizations], NGOs, universities, and public agencies in emerging markets. This course comprises two sections: 1. Field research methods, which provide students with a strong theoretical grounding on how to collect and report primary data in publishable works (e.g., case studies). 2. Development of field safety, research protocols and client pre-engagement opportunities for students who have successfully been selected to participate in the Student Multidisciplinary Applied Research Teams (SMART) projects. For information on SMART, visit the Student Multidisciplinary Applied Research Teams (SMART) Program website.
outcome: Describe the legal and ethical considerations for research dealing with human participants., Identify global trends and issues that might promote social, economic, technological, and policy development within resource-poor counties, organizations, and communities., Identify and employ various resources that will promote meaningful cross-cultural and multidisciplinary communication, learning, and working to solve an applied business problem., Apply, use, and synthesize multiple environmental scanning frameworks in analyzing the macro and micro-environments of social enterprises in emerging markets., 

class: AEM 5420
class title: Emerging Markets
description: Provides a framework for examining the effectiveness of marketing strategies in economies in transition and identifying the challenges and opportunities for firms in low-income economies to access industrial markets. Appraises the risk of entering markets in low-income economies and assesses the political, legal, cultural, and economic forces. Analyzes and discusses case studies of companies.

class: AEM 5435
class title: Data Driven Marketing
description: This course deals with the use of data to make marketing decisions. It introduces concepts, methods, and applications of analytics to products, markets, and marketing actions. Unlike marketing courses that focus on conceptual material, this course will provide skills to translate conceptual understanding into specific operational plans – a skill in increasing demand in organizations today.
outcome: Develop appreciation for the value of evidence-based decision making in marketing., Use the vocabulary of marketing analytics., Develop and apply common analytical tools in marketing., Utilize the findings from analytical models to improve marketing decisions in business situations., 

class: AEM 5550
class title: Marketing Strategy
description: This is an analytical and quantitative course focusing on advertising strategy. In this course we will analyze how advertising affects product demand and competitive responses from rival products. Why and how do consumers respond to advertising? What is their sensitivity to advertising expenditures, if any? Can we measure that sensitivity? What role does advertising play in (spurious?) product differentiation? Does advertising change preferences, consumers' willingness to pay or both? And, most importantly, why should we care? Why do distilled and blended liquor, real estate agents, motion pictures and soap and detergent producers have the highest advertising expenditure-to-sales ratios (at 10-15%); whereas convenience stores, dairy products and tire producers have the lowest (all under 2%). These are some of the questions that will be discussed and answered during this course.
outcome: Explain the role and the importance of traditional and digital advertising in a rapidly changing business landscape., Discuss and critically evaluate the key elements of a firm's advertising strategy., Illustrate how the effectiveness of an advertising campaign can be measured., Demonstrate advanced analytical skills in advertising data analysis and appropriate data visualization techniques to effectively communicate the insights from data analysis., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100, ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: AEM 5570
class title: Corporate Finance
description: This course provides a rigorous treatment of the core concepts of corporate finance for finance majors. Topics studied in this course include, but are not limited to, capital budgeting, corporate governance, capital structure, payout policy, valuation, raising capital, risk management, and mergers and acquisitions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: coursework in introductory finance.

class: AEM 5585
class title: Sustainable Business
description: This course provides a survey of the rapidly evolving area of corporate sustainability for graduate students and advanced undergraduates. The focus of the course will be on understanding the ways in which growing concerns about human health and wellbeing and the environment may (or may not) affect corporate behavior. Through a combination of classroom presentations, discussion of case studies, assigned readings, and independent research, students will learn about the most important themes in corporate sustainability, including environmental and social risk management, sustainability initiatives and self-regulation in the corporate sector, stakeholder engagement and management, and the growth of sustainable finance and business, including green entrepreneurship and ESG investing.
outcome: Identify the key trends in the broad field of corporate sustainability and the risks and opportunities that arise from a growing public awareness of the environmental, social, and other impacts of corporate activity., Recognize sustainability risks associated with particular corporate activities and will be able to propose actions that mitigate these risks., Examine the interactions between corporate entities and their competitors, regulators, the public, and their other stakeholders, and to put forward recommendations on how to improve the outcomes of these interactions., Identify opportunities and propose ways in which the tools of finance can be leveraged to better manage natural resources and reach desirable social objectives., 

class: AEM 5600
class title: Managerial Economics
description: This course covers topics in microeconomics that inform managerial decisions, including intermediate principles of microeconomics. Examples will be drawn from recent business cases.
outcome: Know and be able to use economic models of production and consumption to make predictions about behavior., Apply economic models to business cases for the purpose of evaluating decisions., Use economic models of risky choice and time discounting to evaluate decisions., Use economic models of monopolistic competition to make predictions about behavior., Use basic concepts of game theory in simple games to make behavioral predictions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, ECON 1120, MATH 1110 or equivalents.

class: AEM 5670
class title: Investments
description: The course provides a broad overview of investment management, focusing on the application of finance theory to the issues faced by portfolio managers and investors in general.  Topics include asset allocation, asset pricing models such as the capital asset pricing model and arbitrage pricing theory, active portfolio management, and performance evaluation.  These tools provide a disciplined way of thinking about investment decisions, while simultaneously framing how we think about the historical performance of markets.  While particular attention will be given to equity markets, we will also touch on implications for fixed income and derivative securities.  Finally, we will spend time looking at alternative asset classes such as hedge funds and private equity.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: coursework in introductory finance.

class: AEM 5700
class title: MPS Management Communication
description: Communication is perhaps the most complex thing humans do. It is arguably the most critical skill for thriving and surviving in almost any situation in the business world. This course is designed to improve your oral communication and presentation skills in the business environment. Course content includes hands-on lessons in effective design along with individual team, and virtual presentations. Public speaking, interpersonal skills, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills are emphasized. Development of these skills is integrated with the use of technology.
outcome: Students will be able to create appropriate structure, content, and format for business presentations., Students will be able to analyze and adapt to specific audience needs as well as to the requirements of various oral communication scenarios., Students will be able to develop effective oral delivery styles and clear use of visual media in order to present research and recommendations to a large group., Students will be able to collaborate successfully with others, in small group team settings, and in presentations with multiple speakers and ongoing audience interaction., 

class: AEM 5840
class title: Python Programming for Data Analysis and Business Modeling
description: Data-driven decision making and the use of analytical approaches are critical skills for success in business. Analytics skills are increasing in demand and in many cases, are required for business professionals. The new technologies and development such as personal electrical devices, social media, online shopping, ... resulted in exponential growth in the amount of data we generate and collect on a daily basis. Companies are highly interested in extracting knowledge from these sources. To be able to manipulate and analyze a large structured and unstructured dataset, you need to learn how to code. In this course, by learning Python, one of the most popular programming languages, you are taking a significant step in data analysis. You will learn how to design and code an algorithm and manipulate datasets.
outcome: Program Python, a strong and popular open source programming language., Develop algorithmic thinking., Utilize and understand Basic Data Structures., Utilize and understand Conditional Branching and Looping., Create functions in Python., Utilize Python libraries that can be used for business analytics., Develop skills in building models to solve real-world business problems., Produce a Python solution for a business application., 

class: AEM 6030
class title: Contemporary Issues in Agricultural Finance
description: This course is a half-semester course course in mathematical programming designed to deepen an understanding of the role of risk in a portfolio choice framework. As a complement to AEM 6050, Agricultural Finance and Development, this course should be of particular interest to students in, agricultural finance, agricultural economics, development economics, financial economics, or any other related discipline. The focus of the course is in the design and structure of mathematical programming models that include risk. Core to this is the understanding of primal and dual structures and the importance of Kuhn-Tucker conditions in the economic interpretation of mathematical programming solutions. Topics may include, but are not limited to 1. An introduction to linear programming and model structure 2. Portfolio choice and quadratic programming in investments and agriculture. 3. Direct Expected Utility Maximization 4. Semi-variance and non-convex models of risk.
outcome: Explain the use and application of mathematical programming techniques to problems of portfolio selection and risk optimization., Explain the mathematical and economic relationships of dual structures in nonlinear optimization models., Develop linear and nonlinear risk models to a variety of economic problems in finance and agriculture., 

class: AEM 6080
class title: Production Economics
description: Studies the theory of production economics with emphasis on applications to agriculture and natural resources. Topics include the derivation, estimation, and use of production, cost, profit, revenue, demand, and supply functions. Discusses the concepts of efficiency and productivity. Introduces production response over time and under risk.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030, MATH 1110 or equivalents.

class: AEM 6120
class title: Applied Econometrics
description: The objective is to provide students with a set of theoretical, econometric, and practical skills to test predictions from economic theory in data and to estimate the causal impacts of a policy or program. Modules 1-5 of the course will cover underlying tools and concepts, including mathematical statistics, linear models for cross-sectional and panel data, non-linear models, and hypothesis testing. In modules 6-7 we cover topics related to causal inference, instrumental variables, coefficient stability, and difference-in-difference estimators. Throughout the course, students will be evaluated on both theoretical and empirical applications.
outcome: Estimate a variety of linear and non-linear models of microeconomic data., Explain how departures from the classical model have implications for the estimated coefficients and variance-covariance matrix in a linear model., Derive maximum likelihood estimators., Test simple and composite hypotheses., Understand and apply difference-in-differences estimators for causal inference., Replicate the findings of a published paper using existing data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2100, MATH 1110 or equivalent.

class: AEM 6140
class title: Behavioral Economics and Managerial Decisions
description: Behavioral economics integrates psychology and economics by identifying systematic anomalies in decision making. These are now recognized to be an important source of error in business decisions, and they provide the foundation for both behavioral marketing and finance. The course compares rational choice theory with behavior both in lecture and through a series of economics experiments in which students face situations that are likely to lead to anomalies such as "the winner's curse," the status quo bias, hyperbolic discounting, and bias in assessing risks. Students have the opportunity to evaluate their own decision making.
outcome: Students will be able to explain the major decision making anomalies that constitute the core of behavioral economics., Apply lessons from behavioral economics to actual business decision making., Design laboratory experiments testing hypotheses from economics and psychology that relate to economic decision making., Explain IRB requirements and procedures regarding human subjects and confidentiality., Administer experiments and analyze the data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 2600 or ECON 3030 or PUBPOL 2000 or equivalent.

class: AEM 6145
class title: Business and Management Fundamentals for STEM Graduate Students
description: Basic business and management skills are necessary to advance your career no matter what area of STEM discipline you plan to pursue. The purpose of this course is to provide the skills necessary to present a strong business case for any new biomedical or life science technology. Like any foreign language, "business eeze" has its own vocabulary, grammar principles and culture. The course will be presented in a similar fashion utilizing STEM case studies to emphasize and immerse the student in business and managerial principles.
outcome: Discuss the components and importance of a financial statement. Calculate the cost and benefit of new equipment., Differentiate between marketing and advertising. Recognize his/her own personal strengths and weaknesses., Converse confidently with those involved in the technology "business"., Determine the value of new biomedical technology from a business perspective., Prepare a strong business case for any new biomedical device or technology., Explain the difficulties in getting new technology into the healthcare marketplace., 

class: AEM 6245
class title: Organizational Behavior
description: This course examines evidence-based principles of individual and group behavior in relation to leadership and management. Topics include the nature and design of groups, the factors that improve team performance, and the importance of skills including dispute resolution, persuasion, and negotiations, Assignments provide opportunities for the engagement and application of analytical skills relating to real-world organizations. Graduate students are required to complete more detailed written assignments (e.g., more pages, deeper analyses; and integration of more research) in addition to all assignments required of the undergraduates.
outcome: Students will be able to juxtapose and consider organizational dynamics that involve individuals and groups across a wide array of model domains., Students will closely and directly engage an array of research/analytic methodologies that have applicability across industries., Students will leverage lessons that are available from their past organizational experiences for the purposes of leadership development as well as organizational analysis and management., 

class: AEM 6325
class title: Leadership and Management in Sports
description: This course draws upon the study of sports for the purpose of understanding and studying evidence-based principles of individual and organizational behavior. Topics include the nature of motivation, momentum, and coaching as well as the challenges of talent identification, team-level coordination, and strategy development. Assignments provide opportunities for the development and application of analytic skills relating to leadership and management.
outcome: Students will be able to consider and juxtapose organizational dynamics that involve individuals and teams across and beyond the domain of sports., Students will closely and directly engage an array of research/analytic methodologies that applicability inside and outside of sports-focused organizations., Students will leverage lessons that are available from the study of sports for the purposes of leadership development as well as organizational analysis and management., 

class: AEM 6410
class title: Commodity Futures and Options
description: This course focuses on markets for agricultural futures and options contracts. Lectures address hedging and risk management with futures and options as well as the structure of risk and random walks.
outcome: Explain the role of futures, options, and other derivatives in the pricing of agricultural products., Price forwards and options ("pricing models")., Explain the fundamental probabilities and dynamics describing asset risk., Develop and understand hedging and trading strategies with derivatives., Use derivatives to reallocate risk., Use derivatives for corporate risk management., Explain the financial crisis arose and how to prevent it., Explain how to design and value financially engineered products including exotic options and weather derivatives., 

class: AEM 6455
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include: economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food and nutrition policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., Graduate students will be required to lead/mentor their case study group of undergraduate students and be provided with an opportunity to identify an area of future graduate research for his/her own thesis., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: AEM 6485
class title: Economics of Food and Malnutrition
description: This course focused on the economics of food and malnutrition from the perspective of individuals and households; that is, a micro-economic approach. Topics include characteristics and constraints associated with food production in both developed and developing countries; the determinants of household food security; the social and economic causes and consequences of undernutrition; the social and economic causes and consequences of obesity; intervention design to reduce food insecurity, undernutrition and obesity.
outcome: Ability to analyze problems of food security and nutrition using perspectives and tools drawn from both economics and nutrition; critically assess studies of the determinants of these; understand the strengths and limitations of interventions designed to ameliorate these., Integrate knowledge from the biological and social sciences to address nutrition problems facing individuals, societies, and governments., Ability to understand and analyze quantitative data on food security and nutrition., Ability to access and critically evaluate scientific information from the primary research literature to investigate the causal effects of nutrition., Motivation to engage in debates surrounding the design and implementation of innovative solutions to current existing and future problems related to food, hunger, and nutrition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, AEM 2100, or equivalent, and nine additional credits in economics, applied economics, or nutrition.

class: AEM 6490
class title: Financial Markets and Sustainability
description: This course provides a broad overview of the financial markets, including the structure and function of these markets, the financial products that are transacted on them, and the institutions that operate within them, while addressing how financial markets are evolving in response to the challenges of sustainability. Through the use of case studies, lectures, readings, and project work, students learn how the leading actors in the financial services industry operate, what motivates them, and how they facilitate the flow of capital between those who can provide financing and those who need it. In parallel with this, the course explores how the tools of finance can be used to generate social and environmental returns in addition to financial returns.
outcome: Describe the structure of the financial markets, explain the role of key market actors, and discuss the attributes of the main products and services transacted on the financial markets., Recognize and assess the negative externalities likely to result from particular financial transactions., Illustrate how financial products and services are utilized by sustainable finance practitioners to generate social and environmental co-benefits such as ecosystem conservation, poverty reduction, and improved education., Evaluate proposed sustainable finance transactions and weigh their potential to generate both financial returns and nonfinancial returns., Identify sources of unused natural or social capital and propose strategies to unlock cash flows currently locked within such sources., 

class: AEM 6533
class title: Federal Income Taxation of Low Income Taxpayers
description: This course covers the present structure of tax law in the United States, including the measurement of taxable income, tax compliance fundamentals, and other related Federal and state tax issues facing low-income taxpayers, with some emphasis on immigrant taxpayers. Participants also discuss various tax research and compliance tools that may be used by practitioners and/or volunteer low-income taxpayer assistance programs. Guest lecturers will focus on specific topics such as the rules surrounding ITIN preparation and other tax issues unique to low-income taxpayers.
outcome: Develop effective communication skills when dealing with low-income taxpayers, including immigrant taxpayers., Attain analytical and functional competency in various areas of Federal and state tax law., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply to real-world settings., Demonstrate the ability to solve practical tax problems that surround low-income taxpayers., Develop skills to be critical consumers of tax information and research., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEM 4531 or LAW 6441.

class: AEM 6700
class title: Economics of Consumer Demand
description: This is a course based in economic theory and its empirical applications, focusing on consumer demand. We will study the core of consumer theory and essential mathematical economics to understand how researchers, private businesses and policymakers use models of consumer behavior and demand response to support decision-making. We will identify relevant consumer demand related problems/issues; analyze how economic theory can help us shed light on these problems/issues; employ basic quantitative models to understand how to use and analyze data to understand consumer demand and behavior; and discuss how theory and empirical models can support decision-making in the real world.
outcome: Describe the theories and the types of data available to analyze consumer demand., Identify a variety of applied models that address fundamental problems in consumer demand., Implement framing, solving and communicating solutions to demand., Demonstrate preparedness for advanced courses in microeconomics., 

class: AEM 6880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and one India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability, climate change, and economic development in the US and these two countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers., 

class: AEM 6960
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: AEM 6980
class title: Supervised Graduate Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give graduate students teaching experience through involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of departmental faculty members. The experience may include leading discussion sections, preparing, assisting in, or teaching lectures and laboratories, and tutoring. Students are expected to actually teach at least one hour per week for each credit awarded. Students may not receive both pay and credit for the same hours of preparation and teaching.

class: AEM 6990
class title: M.P.S. Research
description: Students complete a problem solving project addressing practical issues in applied economics and/or management.
 

class: AEM 6991
class title: MPS Research Seminar I
description: This course is for students to understand how different research questions can be addressed with empirical methods. Students will also work on their own MPS project research and regularly present their progress.
outcome: Create a research design., Collect data, independent research., Explain analytical techniques., Report on the results, including visualization., 

class: AEM 7000
class title: Individual Study in Applied Economics and Management
description: Used for special projects designed by faculty members. More than one topic may be given each semester in different sections. Student must register in section appropriate to topic being covered; section number is provided by instructor.

class: AEM 7030
class title: Graduate Seminar
description: Students are exposed to the cutting edge research by visiting lecturers in applied economics and management. Additional lectures cover important skills for success in graduate study in applied economics and management.
outcome: To provide graduate students an understanding of the state of the art in research in the fields of applied economics. Students should be able to assess the quality and level of innovation of research manuscripts upon completion of this course., 

class: AEM 7040
class title: Applied Macroeconomics
description: AEM 7040 covers analytical concepts and techniques of dynamic analysis, with a focus on optimal control theory as applied to problems in applied macroeconomics. The course also covers macroeconomic applications of these methods that are relevant to the environment, energy, natural resources, agriculture, development, management, finance, marketing, accounting, industrial organization, innovation, entrepreneurship, organizations, technology, and business economics. Topics covered include optimal control theory, capital theory, the maximum principle, the stationary rate of return to capital, investment, dynamic competitive equilibrium, calculus of variations, q-theory, optimal economic growth, optimal savings, optimal growth with pollution, the environmental Kuznets curve, optimal multisector growth, limits to growth, national income accounting, sustainability, natural capital, discounting, structural uncertainty, catastrophes, the dismal theorem, climate change, innovation, endogenous technical change, and productivity.
outcome: Students will learn and apply analytical concepts and techniques of dynamic analysis., Students will examine and analyze macroeconomic applications of these methods that are relevant to the environment, energy, natural resources, agriculture, development, management, finance, marketing, accounting, industrial organization, innovation, entrepreneurship, organizations, technology and business economics., Students will be able to discuss and apply optimal control theory, capital theory, the maximum principle, the stationary rate of return to capital, investment, dynamic competitive equilibrium, calculus of variations, q-theory, optimal economic growth, optimal savings, optimal growth with pollution, the environmental Kuznets curve, optimal multisector growth, limits to growth, national income accounting, sustainability, natural capital, discounting, structural uncertainty, catastrophes, the dismal theorem, climate change, innovation, endogeneous technical change, and productivity., Students will develop the creative and critical thinking skills needed for research in the area., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: multivariable calculus, differential equations, and graduate-level microeconomics.

class: AEM 7150
class title: Applied Microeconomic Research
description: This course consists of an applied microeconomic research project. Students are required to select a mentor for the project.

class: AEM 7620
class title: Microeconomics of International Development
description: This course introduces students to the key theories, canonical papers, and current frontiers in the microeconomics of international development. We cover topics related to agricultural household models, consumption smoothing, labor markets, trade and search, relational contracts, and public finance. Paired with AEM 7621 to form a graduate sequence in development economics.
outcome: Explain, use, and critically assess the findings of frontier research papers in the economics of developing countries., Understand and apply core models of consumer-producer households, consumption smoothing, labor markets, sectoral change, and domestic trade to problems of growth, poverty, and resource allocation in developing countries., Interpret and evaluate empirical research on the economic and social impacts of policies and programs., Formulate succinct, informed arguments on a specific research area of the student's choosing related to the economics of developing countries., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of first-year Ph.D. course sequence in AEM or ECON or permission of instructor.

class: AEM 7670
class title: Topics in International Finance
description: This course will provide a selective overview of topics at the cutting-edge of academic research and policy debates about the international monetary and financial system. Main areas will include the effects of financial globalization on growth, volatility, and the transmission of business cycles, as well as the determinants of capital flows and exchange rates. The course will cover topics at the intersection of international finance and macroeconomics, with particular emphasis on the implications for monetary policy and financial regulation. New research related to Fintech, cryptocurrencies, and central bank digital currencies will also be covered. This course is intended for advanced Ph.D. students, especially those in search of thesis topics, and will require extensive student involvement in preparing research proposals and critiques of existing literature. Students will develop their own research ideas during the course and are required to write a substantive research paper.
outcome: Discuss topics at the cutting-edge of academic research and policy debates about the international financial system., Identify key aspects of the literature on the effects of financial globalization, including growth, volatility, and the transmission of business cycles., Explain the causes and effects of the global financial crisis and what implications it has for the research agenda in international finance and macroeconomics., Review the latest literature on monetary policy and financial regulation, with an emphasis on these issues in the context of emerging market economies., Develop their own research ideas, building on material covered in the course, and start working on their Ph.D. or Master's theses or second-year papers., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Ph.D. level courses in macroeconomics and applied econometrics.

class: AEM 7852
class title: Sustainable Environment, Energy and Resource Economics Research Seminar
description: The goal of this weekly seminar is to provide a formal and organized venue for PhD students and faculty to interact and discuss research on environmental, energy and resource economics and the economics of sustainability, and to be exposed to the frontier in the area.
outcome: Present original research in sustainable environment, energy and resource economics., Effectively communicate research ideas through writing and speech., Use and evaluate scientific and economic information to reach defensible conclusions., Be able to specify the original contribution of the research to the existing literature., 

class: AEM 7900
class title: Graduate-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. students only before A" exam has been passed.

class: AEM 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for master's students.

class: AEM 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. students only after "A" exam has been passed.

class: AEP 1100
class title: Lasers and Photonics
description: Lasers have had an enormous impact on communications, medicine, remote sensing, and material processing. This course reviews the properties of light that are essential to understanding the underlying principles of lasers and these photonic technologies. There also is a strong, hands-on laboratory component in which the students build and operate a nitrogen laser and participate in several demonstration experiments such as holography, laser processing of materials, optical tweezers, and fiber optics.

class: AEP 1200
class title: Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanoengineering
description: Lecture/laboratory course designed to introduce first-year students to some of the ideas and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology with stronger emphasis on nanobiotechnology in the spring semester. Topics include nanoscience and nanotechnology-what they are and why they are of interest; atoms and molecules; the solid state; surfaces; behavior of light and material particles when confined to nanoscale dimensions; scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM); microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) design; basic micromachining and chemical synthesis methods, i.e., "top-down" and "bottom-up" approaches to nanofabrication; how to manipulate structures on the nanoscale; physical laws and limits they place on the nanoworld; some far-out ideas. In the laboratory, students construct a simple STM to record atomic resolution images; learn through hands on experience the basic workings of an SEM; use a MEMS computer-aided design software package to model the entire manufacturing sequence of a simple MEMS device, examine the simulated behavior of the device and compare it with real behavior; investigate the optical properties of quantum dots and the unexpected properties of fluids that flow through narrow channels.
outcome: An introductory understanding of quantum mechanics and optics as applied to nanoscience and nanotechnology., Acquired a basic understanding of the tools and fabrication techniques used in nanoscience and nanotechnology., 

class: AEP 2170
class title: Physics II: Electricity and Magnetism
description: Second in a three semester introductory physics sequence. Explores quantitative modeling of the physical world through a study of electricity and magnetism. More mathematical and abstract than a typical introductory electricity and magnetism course. Topics include electrostatics, behavior of matter in electric fields, circuits, magnetic fields, Faraday's law, AC circuits, and electromagnetic waves. Makes substantial use of vector calculus. At the level of Electricity and Magnetism by Purcell.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1110 with PHYS 1112, PHYS 1116, PHYS 2213, for students matriculating Fall 2021 or later, to complete the required sequence; Vector calculus at the level of MATH 1920, MATH 2220, or MATH 2240. Mathematics prerequisites can be waived at discretion of instructor.

class: AEP 3330
class title: Mechanics of Particles and Solid Bodies
description: Newtonian mechanics, especially with dissipative forces; objects rotating around a constant direction and possibly translating, using both torque and energy; coupled and damped-driven linear oscillations and an introduction to nonlinear systems; an introduction to variational calculus; Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalism for generalized coordinates; central-force motion and a brief introduction to scattering; non-inertial reference systems; 3D motion of rigid bodies. (At the level of Classical Dynamics by Marion and Thornton and Classical Mechanics by John Taylor).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112 or PHYS 1116. Corequisite: AEP 4200 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: AEP 3560
class title: Intermediate Electrodynamics
description: Second course in theory of electromagnetism: Magnetic materials, Faraday's law, Maxwell equations, electromagnetic waves, reflection and transmission, guided waves, and radiation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEP 3550 and AEP 4200.

class: AEP 3610
class title: Introductory Quantum Mechanics
description: Introductory course in quantum mechanics. Topics include Schrodinger's equation and the statistical interpretation of the wavefunction, potentials in 1 to 3 dimensions, Dirac notation and Hilbert space, ladder operators for harmonic potentials and angular momentum, exact solutions for the hydrogen atom and spin systems. Emphasis is on developing both an intuitive understanding of quantum mechanics and how to apply it rigorously.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2214 or PHYS 2218. Corequisite: AEP 4200.

class: AEP 3630
class title: Electronic Circuits
description: Practical electronics as encountered in a scientific or engineering research/development environment. Analyze, design, build, and test circuits using discrete components and integrated circuits. Analog circuits: resistors, capacitors, operational amplifiers, feedback amplifiers, oscillators, comparators, passive and active filters, diodes, and transistor switches and amplifiers. Digital circuits: combinational and sequential logic (gates, flipflops, registers, counters, timers), analog to digital (ADC) and digital to analog (DAC) conversion, signal averaging, and computer architecture and interfacing. Additional topics may include analog and digital signal processing, light wave communications, transducers, noise reduction techniques, and computer-aided circuit design. At the level of Art of Electronics by Horowitz and Hill.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate course in electricity and magnetism (e.g., PHYS 2208, PHYS 2213, or PHYS 2217) or permission of instructor.

class: AEP 4200
class title: Intermediate Mathematical Physics
description: Covers Fourier and Laplace transforms, ordinary and partial differential equations, separation of variables, Method of Frobenius, Laplace transform techniques. Green's functions, wave and diffusion equations, Solutions to Laplace's Equation, Hermitian Operators, Sturm-Liouville operators, Bessel functions, Legendre Polynomials, spherical harmonics.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEP 3200.

class: AEP 4230
class title: Statistical Thermodynamics
description: Quantum statistical basis for equilibrium thermodynamics, microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles, and partition functions. Classical and quantum ideal gases, paramagnetic and multiple-state systems. Maxwell-Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein statistics and applications. Introduction to systems of interacting particles. At the level of Introductory Statistical Mechanics by Bowley and Sanchez.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: junior level QM, E&amp;M, and mathematics at the level of AEP 3610, AEP 3550, AEP 3200, and AEP 4200.

class: AEP 4380
class title: Computational Engineering Physics
description: Introduction to Numerical computation (e.g., derivatives, integrals, differential equations, matrices, boundary-value problems, FFT's, Monte Carlo methods) as applied to engineering physics problems that cannot be solved analytically (e.g., chaotic systems, three-body problem, electrostatic fields, quantum energy levels). C/C++ computer programming required (some Matlab, Python, etc.). Some prior exposure to programming assumed but no previous experience with C/C++ assumed.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: AEP 3200, PHYS 2214 or PHYS 2218, CS 1110 or CS 1112, or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Corequisite: AEP 3330, AEP 3610, AEP 4200.

class: AEP 4500
class title: Introductory Solid State Physics
description: Introduction to the physics of crystalline solids. Covers crystal structures; diffraction; electronic states and density functional theory; lattice vibrations; and metals, insulators, and semiconductors. Covers optical properties, magnetism, and superconductivity as time allows. The majority of the course addresses the foundations of the subject, but time is devoted to modern and/or technologically important topics such as quantum size effects. At the level of Introduction to Solid State Physics by Kittel or Solid State Physics by Ashcroft and Mermin.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: AEP 4812
class title: Quantum Information Processing
description: Hardware that exploits quantum phenomena can dramatically alter the nature of computation. Though constructing a general purpose quantum computer remains a formidable technological challenge, there has been much recent experimental progress. In addition, the theory of quantum computation is of interest in itself, offering new perspectives on the nature of computation and information, as well as providing novel insights into the conceptual puzzles posed by quantum theory. This course is intended for physicists, unfamiliar with computational complexity theory or cryptography, and for computer scientists and mathematicians with prior exposure to quantum mechanics. Topics include: simple quantum algorithms, error correction, cryptography, teleportation, and uses of quantum computing devices either currently available or to be available in the near future.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 3316 or AEP 3610.

class: AEP 4900
class title: Undergraduate Research in Engineering Physics
description: Laboratory or theoretical work in any branch of engineering physics under the direction of a member of the faculty. The study can take a number of forms; for example, design of laboratory apparatus, performance of laboratory measurements, computer simulation or software developments, theoretical design and analysis. Details TBD with respective faculty member.

class: AEP 4910
class title: Honors Research in Engineering Physics
description: Laboratory or theoretical work in any branch of engineering physics under the direction of a member of the faculty. The study can take a number of forms; for example, design of laboratory apparatus, performance of laboratory measurements, computer simulation or software developments, theoretical design and analysis. A written report, an oral presentation and at least a grade of A- is required for successful completion of the Engineering Physics honors requirement.

class: AEP 5200
class title: Intermediate Mathematical Physics
description: Covers Fourier and Laplace transforms, ordinary and partial differential equations, separation of variables, Method of Frobenius, Laplace transform techniques. Green's functions, wave and diffusion equations, Solutions to Laplace's Equation, Hermitian Operators, Sturm-Liouville operators, Bessel functions, Legendre Polynomials, spherical harmonics.

class: AEP 5230
class title: Statistical Thermodynamics
description: Quantum statistical basis for equilibrium thermodynamics, microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles, and partition functions. Classical and quantum ideal gases, paramagnetic and multiple-state systems. Maxwell-Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein statistics and applications. Introduction to systems of interacting particles. At the level of Introductory Statistical Mechanics by Bowley and Sanchez.

class: AEP 5330
class title: Mechanics of Particles and Solid Bodies
description: Newtonian mechanics, especially with dissipative forces; objects rotating around a constant direction and possibly translating, using both torque and energy; coupled and damped-driven linear oscillations and an introduction to nonlinear systems; an introduction to variational calculus; Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalism for generalized coordinates; central-force motion and a brief introduction to scattering; non-inertial reference systems; 3D motion of rigid bodies. (At the level of Classical Dynamics by Marion and Thornton and Classical Mechanics by John Taylor).

class: AEP 5380
class title: Computational Engineering Physics
description: Introduction to Numerical computation (e.g., derivatives, integrals, differential equations, matrices, boundary-value problems, FFT's, Monte Carlo methods) as applied to engineering physics problems that cannot be solved analytically (e.g., chaotic systems, three-body problem, electrostatic fields, quantum energy levels). C/C++ computer programming required (some Matlab, Python, etc.). Some prior exposure to programming assumed but no previous experience with C/C++ assumed.

class: AEP 5502
class title: Introductory Solid State Physics
description: Introduction to the physics of crystalline solids. Covers crystal structures; diffraction; electronic states and density functional theory; lattice vibrations; and metals, insulators, and semiconductors. Covers optical properties, magnetism, and superconductivity as time allows. The majority of the course addresses the foundations of the subject, but time is devoted to modern and/or technologically important topics such as quantum size effects. At the level of Introduction to Solid State Physics by Kittel or Solid State Physics by Ashcroft and Mermin.

class: AEP 5560
class title: Intermediate Electrodynamics
description: Second course in theory of electromagnetism: Magnetic materials, Faraday's law, Maxwell equations, electromagnetic waves, reflection and transmission, guided waves, and radiation.

class: AEP 5610
class title: Introductory Quantum Mechanics
description: Introductory course in quantum mechanics. Topics include Schrodinger's equation and the statistical interpretation of the wavefunction, potentials in 1 to 3 dimensions, Dirac notation and Hilbert space, ladder operators for harmonic potentials and angular momentum, exact solutions for the hydrogen atom and spin systems. Emphasis is on developing both an intuitive understanding of quantum mechanics and how to apply it rigorously.

class: AEP 7510
class title: M.Eng. Project
description: Independent study under the direction of a member of the university faculty. Students participate in an independent research project through work on a special problem related to their field of interest. A formal and complete research report is required.

class: AEP 7530
class title: Special Topics Seminar in Applied Physics
description: Special topics in applied science, with focus on areas of applied physics and engineering that are of current interest. Subjects chosen are presented in a seminar format by the students. A major goal of this course is to provide training and experience planning, preparing, and presenting proposals, progress reports, technical talks, and research papers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate physics.

class: AEP 7681
class title: Quantum Information Processing
description: Hardware that exploits quantum phenomena can dramatically alter the nature of computation. Though constructing a general purpose quantum computer remains a formidable technological challenge, there has been much recent experimental progress. In addition, the theory of quantum computation is of interest in itself, offering new perspectives on the nature of computation and information, as well as providing novel insights into the conceptual puzzles posed by quantum theory. This course is intended for physicists, unfamiliar with computational complexity theory or cryptography, and for computer scientists and mathematicians with prior exposure to quantum mechanics. Topics include: simple quantum algorithms, error correction, cryptography, teleportation, and uses of quantum computing devices either currently available or to be available in the near future.

class: AIIS 1100
class title: Indigenous North America
description: This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to the diverse cultures, histories and contemporary situations of the Indigenous peoples of North America. Students will also be introduced to important themes in the post-1492 engagement between Indigenous and settler populations in North America and will consider the various and complex ways in which that history affected - and continues to affect - American Indian peoples and societies. Course materials draw on the humanities, social sciences, and expressive arts.
distribution categories: (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AIIS 2350
class title: Archaeology of Indigenous North America
description: This introductory course surveys archaeology's contributions to the study of American Indian cultural diversity and change in North America north of Mexico. Lectures and readings will examine topics ranging from the debate over when the continent was first inhabited to present-day conflicts between Native Americans and archaeologists over excavation and the interpretation of the past. We will review important archaeological sites such as Chaco Canyon, Cahokia, Lamoka Lake, and the Little Bighorn battlefield. A principal focus will be on major transformations in lifeways such as the adoption of agriculture, the development of political-economic hierarchies, and the disruptions that accompanied the arrival of Europeans to the continent.
distribution categories: (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AIIS 2420
class title: Nature-Culture: Ethnographic Approaches to Human Environment Relations
description: One of the most pressing questions of our time is how we should understand the relationship between nature, or the environment, and culture, or society, and whether these should be viewed as separate domains at all. How one answers this question has important implications for how we go about thinking and acting in such diverse social arenas as environmental politics, development, and indigenous-state relations. This course serves as an introduction to the various ways anthropologists and other scholars have conceptualized the relationship between humans and the environment and considers the material and political consequences that flow from these conceptualizations.
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: AIIS 3324
class title: Cayuga Language and Culture
description: An introduction to the language and culture of the Cayuga (Gayogo̱hó꞉nǫʼ) people. Basic language instruction provided in an immersive learning environment, focusing on the relationship of language and culture to plants and growing.
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AIIS 3330
class title: Ways of Knowing: Indigenous and Place-Based Ecological Knowledge
description: Based on indigenous and place-based "ways of knowing," this course (1) presents a theoretical and humanistic framework from which to understand generation of ecological knowledge; (2) examines processes by which to engage indigenous and place-based knowledge of natural resources, the nonhuman environment, and human-environment interactions; and (3) reflects upon the relevance of this knowledge to climatic change, resource extraction, food sovereignty, medicinal plant biodiversity, and issues of sustainability and conservation. The fundamental premise of this course is that human beings are embedded in their ecological systems.
outcome: To appreciate natural resource development from a human ecological perspective., To apply the interdisciplinary lens of human ecology to understand human and environmental relations., To appreciate the complex interconnectivity between the ecological and the cultural., To comprehend that individual actions informed by cultural systems manifest themselves in social structures that rely on ecological foundations., To extend the notion of transdisciplinary to include indigenous and place-based knowledge., To situate indigenous and local knowledge within a humanistic framework of knowledge generation., To illustrate the participatory and experiential basis of indigenous and place-based knowledge., To propose a method best suited for researching such knowledge processes., To value the contributions of indigenous and place-based knowledge in the context of socio-cultural and environmental change and natural resource utilization., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AIIS 3560
class title: Thinking from a Different Place: Indigenous Philosophies
description: The Western nation-state has failed to solve the two most pressing, indeed catastrophic, global problems: poverty and climate change. This failure is due to the inability of national policy to imagine a world beyond a boundary drawn by the formative capitalist ideas of property, production, and profit. The course will begin by discussing the historical origin and continuing force of these ideas while raising questions about their limits. Then it will look at a range of alternative ideas about how the world should work if we want to keep it socially, economically, and ecologically in balance. The alternatives we will query come from a range of Indigenous writers of fiction, poetry, and theory, who locate themselves in Native American (north and south), Aboriginal, and Maori communities.
outcome: Explain Indigenous theory and practice in dealing with social, economic, and environmental issues., Contrast Indigenous theory and practice with Western approaches to these issues at a time of gross income inequality and environmental collapse worldwide., Think critically about the most effective ways to deal with these global issues after having considered both approaches to these issues., 
distribution categories: (D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AIIS 4625
class title: Contemporary Native American Fiction
description: If you haven't read contemporary U.S. American Indian fiction, then it might be fair to ask how much you know about the United States, its origins and its current condition. Since the 1960s, American Indians have been producing a significant body of award-wining novels and short stories. In 1969, for example, N. Scott Momaday, from the Kiowa nation, won the Pulitzer Prize for his novel House Made of Dawn and in 2012 Louise Erdrich, who is Anishinaabe, won the National Book Award for her novel The Round House. In between these two notable moments and since we can list an impressive number of Native storytellers whose work is aesthetically powerful, offering us a narrative of the United States that counters the official history. Centrally the course will focus on the various formal approaches Native writers take from surrealism to realism in representing the (post)colonial situation of Indian country and the ongoing resistance in Indian country to the U.S. legal and political regime.
outcome: Identify contemporary Indigenous writer and the genders they are writing in., Communicate the main theme in the discussed novels that relate to contemporary and historical issues in Indigenous communities, such as land rights, child welfare, protection of Indigenous women, Indigenous governance systems, construction of racial and colonial regimes, etc., Analyze historical and legal trends in Indigenous-federal relations., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AIIS 4720
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: AIIS 4970
class title: Independent Study
description: Topic and credit hours TBA between faculty member and student.

class: AIIS 6451
class title: Indigenous Peoples and American Law
description: The course will focus on the basics of Federal Indian Law, the ever-changing body of case and statutory law and treaties that define the limits and extent of Indian tribal sovereignty in the United States in the late twentieth century. The course will explore the nature and extent of tribal sovereignty at the time of European contact, the changing strategies of the United States in relating to tribes, and the lasting impact of those strategies on current-day tribal communities and their rights of self-government. The course will also explore the role of the United States in protecting tribal sovereignty and tribal resources. It will also examine the powers and jurisdiction of tribal governments with regard to both members and non-members of the tribe, as well as the lack or extent, as the case may be, of state jurisdiction over activities on Indian lands. Students will be encouraged to continually identify and question the legal, political and moral basis of the laws and policies that constitute Federal Indian Law in the United States today. We will also examine the current ALI restatement project for Federal Indian Law.

class: AIIS 6970
class title: Independent Study in American Indian and Indigenous Studies
description: A student may, with approval of a faculty advisor, study a problem or topic not covered in a regular course or may undertake tutorial study of an independent nature in an area of interest in American Indian and Indigenous Studies.

class: AIIS 7720
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 

class: AIRS 1101
class title: Heritage and Values of the United States Air Force I
description: This is a survey course designed to introduce students to the Department of the Air Force (DAF) and provides an overview of the basic characteristics, missions, and organization of the Air and Space Forces.

class: AIRS 1141
class title: Initial Military Experiences I
description: Introduction to the responsibilities, life, and work of an Air Force officer. Basic knowledge of drill and ceremonies, military courtesies, and the wearing of the uniform.

class: AIRS 2201
class title: Team and Leadership Fundamentals I
description: This course focuses on laying the foundation for teams and leadership. The topics include skills that will allow cadets to improve their leadership on a personal level and within a team. The courses will prepare cadets for their field training experience where they will be able to put the concepts learned into practice. The purpose is to instill a leadership mindset and to motivate sophomore students to transition from AFROTC cadet to AFROTC officer candidate.

class: AIRS 2241
class title: Intermediate Military Experiences I
description: Designed to help students develop skill in giving commands for drill and ceremonies. Students are also introduced to the Air Force base environment in which the officer functions. Career areas available based on academic majors are described. Students participate in military drills and ceremonies.

class: AIRS 3301
class title: Leading People and Effective Communication I
description: This course teaches cadets advanced skills and knowledge in management and leadership. Special emphasis is placed on enhancing leadership skills and communication. Cadets have an opportunity to try out these leadership and management techniques in a supervised environment as juniors and seniors.

class: AIRS 3341
class title: Junior Officer Leadership Experiences I
description: Cadets assume leadership responsibilities similar to those of a junior officer. Emphasis is on the importance of applying effective human relations skills in dealing with superiors, peers, and subordinates. Cadets also gain insight into the general structure and progression patterns of selected Air Force officer career fields.

class: AIRS 4401
class title: National Security Affairs: Preparation for Active Duty I
description: This course is designed for college seniors and gives them the foundation to understand their role as military officers in American society. It is an overview of the complex social and political issues facing the military profession and requires a measure of sophistication commensurate with the senior college level. The final semester provides information that will prepare the cadets for Active Duty.

class: AIRS 4441
class title: Advanced Leadership Experiences
description: Cadets assume command leadership responsibilities to operate a military organization. Cadets apply effective leadership and managerial techniques with individuals and groups and participate in self-analysis of leadership and managerial abilities.

class: ALS 1110
class title: Introduction to Digital Agriculture
description: The goal of this course is to expose students to the breadth and diversity of applications of digital tools in modern agriculture with special emphasis on food production systems. We will explore and discuss the main drivers of the digital transformation in agriculture at a local and global scale. Special emphasis will be placed on the integration of basic concepts of systems biology, data science, and engineering. The socio-economic implications of deployment and utilization of digital tools will be covered. Examples of development, deployment, and post-implementation assessment of digital tools for improving the sustainability of plant and animal food production systems will be discussed. Ultimately, students will recognize the need for interdisciplinary efforts to propel the digital transformation of food production agriculture while benefiting society and the planet.
outcome: Recognize and describe the diverse areas of agriculture and food production systems that utilize and are impacted by digital tools., Evaluate, integrate, and apply information from at least two different fields of study to create coherent and persuasive arguments about potential solutions to DA-related problems., Recognize the drivers of the digital transformation in agriculture., Examine the socio-economic implications of adoption of digital tools in agriculture., Ability to logically and clearly present and discuss conclusions from a DA-related study to a multi-disciplinary audience., Acquire team building, analytical, and presentation skills through evaluation, and integration of information related to Digital Agriculture., 

class: ALS 1210
class title: Data Democratization
description: Access to quality data and information is at the heart of an informed and engaged populace. However, the skills required to process and make sense of data have historically been disproportionately held by state and corporate actors who often possess more resources to collect, store and analyze data than everyday people. This is particularly true in the context of surveillance technology, where use of data collected from such means is not equitably distributed, or equally advantageous. Through a framework of data democratization, this class will equip students with the skills needed to critically interrogate and use authentic data from a variety of open data sources to inform their personal decisions, including civic engagement and issue advocacy.
outcome: Describe the strengths and limitations of different quantitative and qualitative data types (e.g., self-report data; observational/trace data; testing data, etc.) and be able to select those most suitable for their research question or need., Identify three sources of open and reusable datasets and locate one dataset based on student interest., Explain how various social factors (economic, cultural, political and personal) influence the production, preservation and use of data, and marginalize the perspectives, histories, and research of certain human communities., Utilize open-source or otherwise free tools for simple data cleanup, analysis and visualization., 

class: ALS 2400
class title: Developing a Reflective Tutoring Practice
description: This course provides tutors with an opportunity to reflect on and refine their own tutoring practice, in the context of literature and theory about peer teaching and learning in an inclusive environment. Participants complete readings, participate in group discussions with hands-on practice and role-playing, conduct peer observations and debrief about those observations, and practice reflective journaling. Most sessions include discussion or sharing of e-Portfolios. Topics discussed in class include developing an active, student-centered tutoring practice, fostering a growth mindset and enhancing resilience in tutors and tutees, managing the unexpected, problem-solving, leading groups, and communicating productively across difference.            
outcome: Develop a student-centered tutoring practice., Practice and master tutoring skills in a safe environment., Provide productive feedback to peers., Create and maintain a comfortable working environment for diverse learners., Identify and refer tutees who need additional help., Respond to emergencies, interruptions, and unanticipated problems during tutoring sessions., Reflect on and evaluate their experiences as tutors., 

class: ALS 3105
class title: Post-Internship: Reflection on Engaged Experiences
description: The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) offers students opportunities for experiential and engaged learning through internships with organizations in communities and organizations locally, domestically, and internationally. While personal and professional growth happens during the internship itself, engaged learning theory suggests that intentional, scaffolded opportunities for reflection on those experiences is what enables transformative student learning and invites students to make connections between their individual actions and larger systems of global change. To that end, in this course students focus on their internship experience to intentionally discern what they have learned and develop a plan for building on that learning going forward. Students will summarize key course takeaways in a poster to be presented during the annual CALS Engaged and Experiential Learning Symposium.
outcome: Articulate the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that they've developed or refined as a result of their internship., Formulate a plan for building on their experience to further their personal and professional development during the remainder of their time at Cornell, as well as in other academic or non-academic contexts., Critically review and share constructive feedback on a peer's work, as well as evaluate the value of feedback received from peers relative to guiding their own revisions., Create an informative and visually appealing poster which effectively communicates engaged learning or research outcomes and related implications., Design and deliver an elevator speech in which they effectively and succinctly convey key points they want their target audience to understand about their poster topic., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: IARD &amp; GDEV majors: GDEV 2105&amp;nbsp;and pre-departure portfolio, or GDEV 3104; CALS Global Fellows: ALS 2300.

class: ALS 4970
class title: Independent Study in Agriculture and Life Sciences
description: Independent study for undergraduate students.

class: ALS 4998
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: ALS 5211
class title: Career Readiness: Engaged Learning for CALS Professional Master's Students
description: This course will provide CALS professional master's students with career readiness, an integral part of achieving success upon degree completion. Career readiness can be defined as the attainment and demonstration of competencies that broadly prepare graduates for a successful career transition. This course will be taught with the Engaged Learning framework, which will give students the opportunity to integrate professional development skills into career and life experiences. Students will engage in interactive sessions covering various topics crucial to career readiness, including goal-setting strategies, networking techniques, strengths identification, application materials preparation, interviewing tactics, and negotiation skills. Additionally, students will participate in mock interviews and information interviews to refine their communication skills. Throughout the course, students will have opportunities to network with alumni, faculty, and industry professionals, fostering mutually beneficial relationships that can enhance their career prospects. By actively participating in this course and utilizing the resources provided, student will develop the confidence and readiness to navigate the complexities of the job market and embark on successful career paths.
outcome: Identify and effectively articulate their professional strengths, skills, and career goals., Craft customized and professional resumes, cover letters and linkedin profiles, using interests and strengths identified through self-assessment., Develop personalized job search plans aligned with their career timelines., Utilize effective networking strategies, tools, and identify networking opportunities with alumni and potential employers., Demonstrate proficiency in interviewing skills., Employ negotiation techniques when evaluating job offers and salary packages using decision-making frameworks., Reflect professionalism through integrity, responsibility, and self-awareness in all aspects of their career pursuits., 

class: ALS 5780
class title: International Teaching Assistant Program Course
description: The International Teaching Assistant Program's (ITAP) foundational course, ALS 5780, provides an opportunity for multilingual graduate students to develop the oral communication skills necessary to be successful in their graduate programs, with emphasis on the skills they may need for teaching in the Cornell classroom. Through weekly classes, conferences with instructors, peer feedback and weekly assignments, students will work on advancing their oral English comprehensibility, pronunciation accuracy and improve their impromptu speaking skills. This course is designed for those working towards meeting the Language Proficiency requirement for teaching at Cornell University.
outcome: Narrate and describe in all major time frames., Engage in spontaneous conversation about topics of personal and general interest/current events., Accurately communicate ideas to listeners who are not accustomed to talking to non-native speakers., Speak in paragraphs, using connected discourse., Self-assess one's own oral language proficiency., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITA Language Assessment or permission of ITAP.

class: ALS 5790
class title: International Teaching Assistant Development Program Course II
description: The International Teaching Assistant Program (ITAP) supports all multilingual graduate students who are currently teaching or plan to teach in the future. Designed as a follow-up to ITAP's foundational course, this course involves highly interactive seminars, consultations with the instructor, and the development of a personalized set of language priorities to help students expand their spoken English proficiency.
outcome: Expand English proficiency in order to communicate effectively as a Teaching Assistant., Narrate and describe in all major time frames., Engage in spontaneous conversation about topics of personal and general interest/current events., Accurately communicate ideas (to listeners who are not accustomed to talking to non-native speakers)., Speak in paragraphs using connected discourse., Self-assess one's own oral language proficiency., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ALS 5780 or permission of ITAP.

class: ALS 5800
class title: International Teaching Assistant Program: Directed Study
description: The International Teaching Assistant Program's Directed Study course, ALS 5800, is designed for multilingual graduate students working toward meeting the Language Proficiency requirement for teaching at Cornell University. Through regular interaction with the instructor, participants will set goals and develop a personal plan of study to advance their English oral communication skills.
outcome: Expand English proficiency to communicate effectively as a Teaching Assistant., Narrate and describe in all major time frames., Engage in conversation about topics of personal and general interest/current events., Accurately communicate ideas (to listeners who are not accustomed to talking to non-native speakers)., Speak in connected paragraphs, using transitions., Self-assess one's own oral language proficiency., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ALS 5780 and ALS 5790.

class: ALS 5900
class title: Project Development: CALS Professional Master's Programs
description: This course is the first in a sequence of two courses: ALS 5900, ALS 5910. Professional Master's students enrolled in this course will work with their advisor on the initial development of a final project to fulfill the requirements of their degree. This project may be an action program, the development of a plan to address a pertinent problem, the development of materials or methodology suited to the student's situation, or the development and execution of research appropriate to the profession. The project highlights the integration of coursework and skills acquired during the degree program.
outcome: Identify a project topic through synthesizing information., Write a project proposal on the selected topic., Develop a plan for project completion, using project management skills., Identify means for collecting relevant information and analyzing data or literature., Analyze data or literature to develop a project report., Demonstrate teamwork by working collaboratively, if appropriate for the project., Critically analyze the findings and impacts of the project., 

class: ALS 5910
class title: Project Completion: CALS Professional Master's Programs
description: This course is the last in a sequence of two courses: ALS 5900, ALS 5910. Professional Master's students enrolled in this course will work with their advisor to finalize a project in fulfillment of the requirements of their degree. The student will analyze and summarize the results of their work. The successful completion of this course indicates the degree project has been finished, reviewed, and approved by the student's field.
outcome: Produce a formal project report., Complete a project demonstrating graduate-level academic standards., Demonstrate critical analysis on a particular topic., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ALS 5900.

class: AMST 1115
class title: Introduction to American Government and Politics
description: A policy-centered approach to the study of government in the American experience.  Considers the American Founding and how it influenced the structure of government;  how national institutions operate in shaping law and public policy; who has a voice in American politics and why some are more influential than others; and how existing public policies themselves influence social, economic, and political power.  Students will gain an introductory knowledge of the founding principles and structure of American government, political institutions, political processes, political behavior, and public policy.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 1290
class title: American Society through Film
description: Introduces students to the sociological analysis of American society through the lens of film. Major themes involve race, class, and gender; upward and downward mobility; incorporation and exclusion; small town vs the big city; and cultural conflicts over individualism, achievement, and community. We match a range of movies like American Graffiti (Lucas), Ace in the Hole (Wilder), The Asphalt Jungle (Houston), Do the Right Thing (Lee), The Heiress (Wyler), High Noon (Zinnemann), Mean Streets (Scorsese), Nashville (Altman), The Philadelphia Story (Cukor), and A Streetcar Named Desire (Kazan). Each film is paired with social scientific research that examines parallel topics, such as analyses of who goes to college, the production of news, deviant careers, urban riots, the gendered presentation of self, and the prisoner's dilemma.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 1500
class title: Introduction to Africana Studies
description: At the inception of this department at Cornell University in 1969, the Africana Studies and Research Center became the birthplace of the field "Africana studies." Africana studies emphasizes comparative and interdisciplinary studies of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. In this course, we will look at the diverse contours of the discipline. We will explore contexts ranging from modernity and the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and plantation complex in the New World to processes of decolonization and globalization in the contemporary digital age. This course offers an introduction to the study of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. This course will examine, through a range of disciplines, among them literature, history, politics, philosophy, the themes - including race/racism, the Middle Passage, sexuality, colonialism, and culture - that have dominated Africana Studies since its inception in the late-1960s. We will explore these issues in an attempt to understand how black lives have been shaped in a historical sense; and, of course, the effects of these issues in the contemporary moment. This course seeks to introduce these themes, investigate through one or more of the disciplines relevant to the question, and provide a broad understanding of the themes so as to enable the kind of intellectual reflection critical to Africana Studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 1576
class title: War in U.S. History: From the Frontier to the Wars on Terror
description: Is war a "way of life" for Americans, as some historians have suggested? In recent years, many Americans have come to think about war as something that happens "over there", away from our own shores, but war – the act of fighting itself, as well as the political, economic and social demands of mobilisation, and the foreign and domestic consequences of military violence – has shaped the United States in countless ways. This course explores both the shadow of war – the seen and unseen effects it has on people and societies – and the substance – the wars themselves – to explore America's relationships with the rest of the world, from the revolutionary period to the present day. At the same time, we we'll also examine non-military and quasi-military encounters between Americans and peoples abroad, including tourism, romantic entanglements, business relationships, and religious proselytising, asking "what is war?", and even whether the United States has ever been at peace. Through this multi-layered focus we will discover some of the many ways in which Americans have thought about, engaged with, impacted, and been impacted by, the world beyond the country's borders, and the extent to which war and violence have played a prominent role in those interactions.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 1600
class title: Indigenous North America
description: This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to the diverse cultures, histories and contemporary situations of the Indigenous peoples of North America. Students will also be introduced to important themes in the post-1492 engagement between Indigenous and settler populations in North America and will consider the various and complex ways in which that history affected - and continues to affect - American Indian peoples and societies. Course materials draw on the humanities, social sciences, and expressive arts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 1770
class title: U.S. History through Literature
description: This lecture course combines historical and literary approaches to explore the inner life of Americans over the last two hundred years. No prior knowledge of US history is assumed. We'll examine the ways in which historical context can shape literary works and the ways in which literature, in turn, can shape history.  How have Americans imagined themselves and their nation?  Has there ever been a stable American identity? The focus will be on literary works that pose questions about race, gender, individualism, and belonging, allowing us to see how writers have both reinforced and resisted cultural pressures.  My hope is that tracing US history through works of the imagination will help in the collective (and perpetual) effort to reimagine American life.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 1951
class title: Foreign Policy as Subversion
description: To what extent does the ideal of the US as a vanguard for democracy and freedom in the world match up with other aspects—military, economic, and humanitarian—of US foreign policy? This same question about the degree to which discourses and practices correspond might be asked of other countries, like the Soviet Union, China, and Britain, but this course examines the ways in which US foreign policy has been deployed over the course of the twentieth century and the ways those policies have been perceived and received by people living in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Particular case studies will be addressed stemming from the faculty's specializations (for example, Vietnam, Cambodia, Guatemala, and Chile) and the emphasis is on the role of the United States in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Prominent themes will include forms of subversion, from military muscle to economic coercion, and how and why they have changed over time; meanings of liberty, democracy, freedom, and sovereignty in different places and times; popular responses to policies and actions of foreign administrations; the relationships between sovereign states and transnational corporations; the uses and abuses of History in the formulation and justification of policy initiatives and in local responses to them; and the complexities involved in discerning internal and external forces in an increasingly transnational world.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 1985
class title: American History from 1500 to 1800
description: On the eve of the American Revolution Britain administered 26 colonies—not just the 13 that would become the United States. British North America's dramatic struggle for independence has led many history textbooks to read the revolution back into colonial history, focusing on those 13 North American colonies that would become the United States, often at the expense of global connections that defined the colonial and revolutionary periods. As this class will explore, key elements of early American history can only be understood through a broader perspective, from the economic growth of New England as a result of the African slave trade and exchange in the Caribbean, to the use of citizenship as a category of exclusion in response to the myriad inhabitants—European, Indigenous, and African—who neighbored or lived within the original 13 colonies. In this course, we will explore the history of early America from the 1490s through the 1800s from a global perspective. Voices usually peripheral to the narrative of American development, from enslaved African mariners to Spanish American nuns, will become central to processes of cultural encounter, labor exploitation, revolutionary upheavals, and state formation that shaped the making and unmaking early America.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2006
class title: Punk Culture: The Art and Politics of Refusal
description: Punk Culture–comprised of music, fashion, literature, and visual arts–represents a complex critical stance of resistance and refusal that coalesced at a particular historical moment in the mid-1970s, and continues to be invoked, revived, and revised. In this course we will explore punk's origins in New York and London, U.S. punk's regional differences (the New York scene's connection to the art and literary worlds, Southern California's skate and surf culture, etc.), its key movements (hardcore, straight edge, riot grrrl, crust, queercore), its race, class and gender relations, and its ongoing influence on global youth culture. We will read, listen, and examine a variety of visual media to analyze how punk draws from and alters previous aesthetic and political movements. No previous experience studying music is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2012
class title: September 11 and the Politics of Memory
description: As a country, we are what we remember. But who decides what facts and stories about the past are important enough to memorialize? What does that decision tell us about power and truth? This class will discuss how the attacks of September 11 are remembered in the United States and the rest of the world.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 2070
class title: Social Problems in the United States
description: "Social Problems in the U.S." teaches students how to think like a social scientist when encountering claims about major contemporary issues. Through readings and assignments, students develop an analytical toolkit for evaluating the scope, causes, consequences, and proposed solutions to a wide range of complicated social problems, such as: childhood poverty, racial segregation and discrimination, job insecurity, family instability, discrimination by sexual identity, unequal pay for women's work, gender imbalances in family life, health disparities, food insecurity, drug abuse, and educational inequality. Rather than cover all of these (and other) social problems in depth, the course emphasizes a conceptual framework that can be applied broadly. The semester culminates with a written proposal examining a social problem and developing an approach to address it with public policy.
outcome: Develop a strategy for discussing controversial social issues with others who hold competing perspectives., Demonstrate an understanding of core concepts from Sociology and Policy Analysis as they relate to topics in education, health, and social welfare., Distinguish between normative, descriptive, and causal claims about social problems as they emerge in public debate., Evaluate the validity of claims about social problems by drawing on evidence from empirical research., Analyze trade-offs and unintended consequences implicated in the design and implementation of social policies., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 2106
class title: Introduction to Latinx Studies
description: This course is an introduction to Latina/o Studies, an interdisciplinary field of knowledge production that focuses on historical, sociopolitical, cultural, and economic experiences of Latinx peoples in the United States—both as a nation and as a geopolitical location in a larger world. We will survey and analyze the arts, histories, cultures, politics, and sociological landscapes of Puerto Ricans, Dominican Americans, Cuban Americans, Mexican Americans, Central Americans, as well as other Latinx peoples who have made communities within the United States for centuries, and who are part of Latinx diasporas. Intersections of U.S. Latinx identities are also explored in this course by asking questions related to the fields housed within Latina/o Studies: How is Latina/o/x identity defined and performed? What does the use of an 'x' in Latinx mean or do? How do histories of race, class, gender, and sexuality in the U.S. impact one's Latina/o/x identity?  Many of these questions will be answered by using scholarship produced by the Latina/o Studies Program faculty at Cornell, familiarizing students with the breadth of research and expertise of program.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2225
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 2253
class title: Diasporas from the Spanish Caribbean
description: This seminar examines the Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican diasporas in the United States. We will examine US relations with these three countries; the root causes of this Caribbean migration; their history in particular urban areas of the United States; and the political, social, and cultural issues that have attracted attention.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 2350
class title: Archaeology of Indigenous North America
description: This introductory course surveys archaeology's contributions to the study of American Indian cultural diversity and change in North America north of Mexico. Lectures and readings will examine topics ranging from the debate over when the continent was first inhabited to present-day conflicts between Native Americans and archaeologists over excavation and the interpretation of the past. We will review important archaeological sites such as Chaco Canyon, Cahokia, Lamoka Lake, and the Little Bighorn battlefield. A principal focus will be on major transformations in lifeways such as the adoption of agriculture, the development of political-economic hierarchies, and the disruptions that accompanied the arrival of Europeans to the continent.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 2354
class title: African American Visions of Africa
description: This seminar examines some of the political and cultural visions of Africa and Africans held by African-American intellectuals and activists in the 19th and 20th centuries. Emphasis is placed on the philosophies of black nationalism, Pan Africanism and anticolonialism and the themes of emigration, expatriation, repatriation and exile. Awareness of Africa and attitudes toward the continent and its peoples have profoundly shaped African-American identity, culture and political consciousness. Notions of a linked fate between Africans and black Americans have long influenced black life and liberation struggles within the U.S. The motives, purposes and outlooks of African-American theorists who have claimed political, cultural, or spiritual connection to Africa and Africans have varied widely, though they have always powerfully reflected black experiences in America and in the West. The complexity and dynamism of those views belie simplistic assumptions about essential or "natural" relationships, and invite critical contemplation of the myriad roles that Africa has played in the African-American mind."
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2375
class title: US Climate Catastrophes: Rethinking US History through the Climate
description: How does our understanding of the current climate emergency change when we examine the past with an environmental lens? In this course, we will think of US history through climate catastrophes, human-made and naturally occurring, to consider how humans and the environment have interacted with each other over time and to reconsider how that relationship has changed within a US context. Rather than focus on the traditional turning points of the US, such as wars or presidents, we will look at the California Gold Rush, the use of DDT, the building of the Oahe Dam, the Love Canal, and 21st-century hurricanes.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2391
class title: From Terra Incognita to Territories of Nation-States: Early American History in Two Dozen Maps
description: This course engages the rich cartographic record of colonial North America via an in-depth analysis of two dozen iconic maps. Integrating visual and textual analysis, students will assess human representations of space across cultural boundaries, explore change over time in the mapmaking practices of indigenous peoples and various European intruders, and study the evolving relationship between cartography and power, attending particularly to the process by which mapping promoted a revolutionary new understanding of American geography as composed of the bounded territories of nation-states.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2401
class title: Introduction to U.S. Latinx Literature
description: Latina/os have always been part of U.S. history, yet the media often represents Latinx as only recent immigrants or as stereotypes that reduce rich cultures into a single, unified category or group of people. This practice hides the many unique and varied voices, stories, experiences, and ideas produced by Latinx expressive practices in forms ranging from novels and poetry to podcasts, tiktoks, films, theater, comics, memoirs, visual arts, and dance. This course will sample all of these forms while considering how artists meditate on their experiences of home, friendship, languages, love, migration, education, racialization, within the contexts of histories of colonization, discrimination, war, invasion, revolution, and ongoing activist organizing for resistance, sustainability, and thriving futures. In addition to common material, students will also have the chance to explore specific expressive practices that interest them.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2620
class title: Introduction to Asian American Literature
description: This course will introduce both a variety of writings and media by Asian North American authors and some critical issues concerning the production and reception of Asian American texts. Working with a variety of genres, we will be asking questions about the relation between literary forms and the socio-historical context within which they take on their meanings, and about the historical formation of Asian American identities. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2640
class title: Introduction to Asian American History
description: An introductory history of Chinese, Japanese, Asian Indians, Filipinos, and Koreans in the United States from the mid-nineteenth century to the 1990s. Major themes include racism and resistance, labor migration, community formation, imperialism, and struggles for equality.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 2650
class title: Introduction to African American Literature
description: This course will introduce students to African American literary traditions in the space that would become North America. From early freedom narratives and poetry to Hip-Hop and film, we will trace a range of artistic conventions and cultural movements while paying close attention to broader historical shifts in American life over the past three centuries. We'll read broadly: poetry, fiction, speculative fiction, newspapers, and the like. We will ask: How do authors create, define, and even exceed a tradition? What are some of the recurring themes and motifs within this tradition? Authors may include: Phillis Wheatley, David Walker, Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, W.E.B. DuBois, Zora Neale Hurston, James Baldwin, Octavia Butler, Toni Morrison, and Eve Ewing. This course satisfies the Literatures of the Americas requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (D-AG)

class: AMST 2665
class title: The American Revolutionary Era
description: As we approach the 250th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence, this course provides students with a comprehensive understanding of the origins, character, and results of the American Revolution, as well as engaging the enduring significance of its memory in contemporary American life - why do we choose to remember the American Revolution in ways that occlude its divisive and bloody events? This course explores many of the key themes of this critical period of American history: the rise of colonial opposition to Great Britain, the nature of the Revolutionary Wars, and the domestic "republican experiment" that followed the Treaty of Paris in 1783. The course emphasizes student interpretations with an eye toward analyzing the comparative experiences of women and men, "everyday people" and famous leaders, Native Americans, African-Americans, and those who opposed the Revolution.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2669
class title: American Political Thought
description: This course offers a survey of American political thought from the colonial period to the present. We will read Puritan sermons, revolutionary pamphlets, philosophical treatises, presidential orations, slave narratives, prison writings, and other classic texts, in order to understand the ideas and debates that have shaped American politics. Topics to be discussed will include the meaning of freedom, the relationship between natural rights and constitutional authority, the idea of popular sovereignty, theories of representation and state power, race and national identity, problems of inequality, and the place of religion in public life. Lectures will be organized around both historical context and close reading of primary texts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2682
class title: Sex, Drugs, and Experimenting with Democracy in 1960s and 1970s America
description: Roots of the United States' most vexing problems can be traced to the 1960s and 1970s. This class explores the struggles to explain these turbulent decades in both popular memory and historical scholarship and the consequences of our interpretations for understanding today. Students will use movies and oral history to investigate the role of perspective, framing, and agency in historical analysis. We will examine the era's struggles over issues such as racial hierarchy, gender roles, abortion, climate change, economic inequality, war, drugs, crime, and democracy.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 2755
class title: Race and Slavery in the Early Atlantic World
description: The legacies of slavery remain all too obvious in the modern Atlantic World. From demographic imbalances to pervasive social and economic inequality, much of the recent past has involved addressing that destructive early modern heritage. This course traces the roots of slavery and race in the Atlantic World from 1400 to 1800. Through lectures, readings, and class discussion, we will examine how politics, culture, gender, and the law intersected to shape the institution of slavery and the development of conceptions of race. As an Atlantic World course, we will take a comparative perspective and ask how different imperial regimes (Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English) fostered different systems of race and slavery in the Americas. We will also ask how the law as a lived experience, gender norms, and imperial politics all worked to shape the production of racial hierarchies.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 2760
class title: American Cinema
description: From the beginning of the twentieth century to the present moment, movies - and in particular Hollywood - have profoundly influenced the ways in which people see, think and talk about the world. Focusing mostly on Hollywood film, this course introduces the study of American cinema from multiple perspectives: as an economy and mode of production; as an art form that produces particular aesthetic styles; as a cultural institution that comments on contemporary issues and allows people to socialize. We will consider the rise of Hollywood in the age of mass production; the star system; the introduction of sound and the function of the soundtrack; Hollywood's rivalry with television; censorship; the rise of independent film, etc. Weekly screenings introduce major American genres (e.g. science fiction, film noir, the musical) and directors (e.g. Hitchcock, Kubrick, Tarantino).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2792
class title: Monuments, Museums, and Memory: An Introduction to Public History
description: In this course we will examine how we have come to narrate social, cultural, and political history in the United States, investigating the ways scholarly, curatorial, archival, and creative practices shape conceptions of the American past, in particular understandings of racial, gender, sexual, and class oppression and resistance. Students will build skills in historical interpretation and archival research and explore possibilities and challenges in preserving and presenting the past in a variety of public contexts—monuments, memorials, museums, historical sites, movies and television, and community-based history projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 2955
class title: Socialism in America
description: "Why no socialism in America?" Scholars and activists have long pondered the relative dearth (compared to other industrialized societies) of sustained, popular, anticapitalist activity in the United States. Sure, leftist movements in the U.S. have often looked and operated differently than those in other parts of the world. But many Americans have forged creative and vibrant traditions of anticapitalism under very difficult circumstances. This class examines socialist thought and practice in the U.S. from the 19th century to the present. We trace intersections of race, class, and gender while exploring the freedom dreams of those who have opposed capitalism in the very heart of global power.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 3121
class title: Crime and Punishment
description: This is a class about the American criminal justice system—from policing to prisons, from arrest to reentry. In many ways, the operation of the modern criminal justice system is taken for granted, which frequently allows it to escape close scrutiny. But we will examine it in great detail, with a focus on how it came about, how it sustains itself, its many roles in society (only some of which involve crime and justice), and how and why it may be changing. In Fall 2022, the class will take a particular look at policing and examine the calls for police reform and abolition. NB: This class is designed to challenge your settled assumptions and dearly held myths about what is right and wrong with the system. Those who have made up their mind about criminal justice in America should not take the course. This class was formerly GOVT 3141, PRISONS, taught by Prof. Margulies. It has been renamed and renumbered as GOVT 3121 to distinguish it from the distance learning course taught by Prof. Katzenstein.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3122
class title: Democracy
description: The United States has been widely associated with democratic ideals, and yet American democracy has been long in the making, even in recent decades retaining hallmarks of an "unfinished work." It has evolved over time through an arduous and halting process, and it has not always moved in the direction of progress. How would we know if American democracy today was truly endangered and subject to "backsliding?" This course engages this question by grappling with what democracy means, how we can measure its attributes, and how we can assess whether they are robust or deteriorating. We focus on four key threats to democracy: political polarization; conflict over membership and status, particularly around race and gender; economic inequality; and the growth of executive power. We will consider the status of of free and fair elections, the rule of law, the legitimacy of the opposition, and the integrity of rights, including voting rights, civil rights, and civil liberties, studying how these features have developed historically and what happened in periods when they were under threat. We will also evaluate the contemporary political context by applying the same analytical tools.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3145
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: AMST 3281
class title: Constitutional Politics
description: This course investigates the United States Supreme Court and its role in politics and government. It traces the development of constitutional doctrine, the growth of the Court's institutional power, and the Court's interaction with Congress, the president, and society. Discussed are major constitutional law decisions, their political contexts, and the social and behavioral factors that affect judges, justices, and federal court jurisprudence.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3330
class title: Ways of Knowing: Indigenous and Place-Based Ecological Knowledge
description: Based on indigenous and place-based "ways of knowing," this course (1) presents a theoretical and humanistic framework from which to understand generation of ecological knowledge; (2) examines processes by which to engage indigenous and place-based knowledge of natural resources, the nonhuman environment, and human-environment interactions; and (3) reflects upon the relevance of this knowledge to climatic change, resource extraction, food sovereignty, medicinal plant biodiversity, and issues of sustainability and conservation. The fundamental premise of this course is that human beings are embedded in their ecological systems.
outcome: To appreciate natural resource development from a human ecological perspective., To apply the interdisciplinary lens of human ecology to understand human and environmental relations., To appreciate the complex interconnectivity between the ecological and the cultural., To comprehend that individual actions informed by cultural systems manifest themselves in social structures that rely on ecological foundations., To extend the notion of transdisciplinary to include indigenous and place-based knowledge., To situate indigenous and local knowledge within a humanistic framework of knowledge generation., To illustrate the participatory and experiential basis of indigenous and place-based knowledge., To propose a method best suited for researching such knowledge processes., To value the contributions of indigenous and place-based knowledge in the context of socio-cultural and environmental change and natural resource utilization., 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3360
class title: American Drama and Theatre
description: Explores major American playwrights from 1900 to 1960, introducing students to American theatre as a significant part of modern American cultural history. We will consider the ways in which theatre has contributed to the construction and deconstruction of a national identity. Similarly, we will examine the influence of the American Theatre on and in film. We will pay special attention to the social, political, and aesthetic contexts of the time period and discuss the shifting popularity of dramatic forms, including melodrama, realism, expressionism, absurdism, and the folk play, in the American theatre canon. Authors include O'Neill, Glaspell, Odets, Rice, Hellman, Hughes, Miller, Williams, and Albee, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3380
class title: Urban Inequality
description: This is an interdisciplinary seminar on inequality in metropolitan American that draws on scholarship from sociology, history, political science, and public policy. The first part of the course is dedicated to understanding the political, historical, and social determinants of inequality in America's cities and their surrounding suburbs. Politically and socially, cities face unique challenges. Municipalities lack much formal authority to resolve issues that arise within their borders and their populations are often highly heterogeneous. In the second part of the course, we investigate several contemporary urban issues, such as schooling, gentrification, immigration, climate change, and downtown development.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3420
class title: Social Justice: Special Topics
description: Social Justice highlights refugee-led organizing and its intersections with un/documented and Indigenous beyond borders activism. We will work with and learn from refugee and asylum seekers led organizations that are started by and run by members of formerly displaced groups. These organizations build collectives and coalitions to organize communities across identities and legal categories and advocate for access to mobility and social justice. We will closely collaborate with these organizations and work on joint research projects.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: AMST 3436
class title: History of the Cops: Racialized Policing in the US
description: The course will study the history of policing and race in the US. Beginning with the origins of American policing in a settler-colonial society, it will study the way whiteness emerged as an identity that depended on the control of both Indigenous and Black people. We will discuss the role of policing in national identity, the defense of slavery, American empire, the rise of urban industrialization, the emergence of professionalized policing, the control of immigrants, and the undermining of Reconstruction. The emergence of twentieth-century America, the identification of crime as a key political and the further development of racialized policing as a core fiscal and ideological project of the American state will be the main focus of the second half of the course. The course will also cover organization against racialized policing in particular as a major political project, source of identity, and root of both solidarity and estrangement between Black and other working class Americans.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: AMST 3463
class title: Contemporary Television
description: This course considers issues, approaches, and complexities in the contemporary television landscape. As television has changed drastically over the past fifteen years, this course provides students with a deeper understanding of the changes in narratives, technologies, forms, and platforms that structure/restructure the televisual world. Students will grapple with how "new media" forms such as web-series and on-demand internet streaming services have changed primetime television. We will balance our look at television shows with nuanced readings about the televisual media industry. By watching, analyzing, and critiquing the powerful medium of television, students will situate their understanding within a broader consideration of the medium's regulation, production, distribution, and reception in the network and post-network era.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3464
class title: Representational Ethics in Film and Television
description: This course is designed to explore the varied ways that race and gender intersect with the media industry. While common industrial logic suggests these descriptors of identity are not a factor in terms of its business models and assumptions, the reality is much more complex. Race, as well as gender, class, and sexuality, play large parts in how media industries function and in informing and shaping audience expectations and assumptions. Thus, the time spent in class will largely consist of deconstructing several media industries, including film, television, and new media to show just how race, as well as other modes of identity such as gender, sexuality, and class, operate within it. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3503
class title: Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes
description: This course offers an opportunity to read in depth two major writers of the twentieth century, Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston.  Friends and one-time collaborators in the New York City of the 1920s, each had important careers that extended long after the Harlem Renaissance period in which they achieved early renown.  This class will survey the myriad genres in which each writer worked (short stories, poetry, novels, drama, critical writing, folklore and anthropology).  And it will also consider the literary, cultural, and political contexts in which both writers achieved early renown and which their work critically contested.  The class concludes by examining the reading works of later major authors (Toni Morrison, Harryette Mullen) who drew directly with Hughes' and Hurston's legacy.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3510
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3562
class title: Thinking from a Different Place: Indigenous Philosophies
description: The Western nation-state has failed to solve the two most pressing, indeed catastrophic, global problems: poverty and climate change. This failure is due to the inability of national policy to imagine a world beyond a boundary drawn by the formative capitalist ideas of property, production, and profit. The course will begin by discussing the historical origin and continuing force of these ideas while raising questions about their limits. Then it will look at a range of alternative ideas about how the world should work if we want to keep it socially, economically, and ecologically in balance. The alternatives we will query come from a range of Indigenous writers of fiction, poetry, and theory, who locate themselves in Native American (north and south), Aboriginal, and Maori communities.
outcome: Explain Indigenous theory and practice in dealing with social, economic, and environmental issues., Contrast Indigenous theory and practice with Western approaches to these issues at a time of gross income inequality and environmental collapse worldwide., Think critically about the most effective ways to deal with these global issues after having considered both approaches to these issues., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3617
class title: Cornell Hip-Hop Collective
description: This course is open to experienced rappers, beatmakers, and vocalists interested forging collaborative relationships with other students. Taking as a foundation hip-hop's relationship to social justice, each semester we will work together to plan and record an EP on a theme or keyword chosen as a group. We will construct and analyze playlists of inspirational material, identifying specific hip-hop compositional strategies for creating beats and rhymes on a theme, and will use these tools to create and workshop our own collaborative tracks in weekly meetings. Please contact the instructor to audition.  

class: AMST 3679
class title: Diasporas, Disasters, and Dissent: Re-Thinking Puerto Rican Studies in the 20th and 21st Centuries
description: "Foreign in a domestic sense" is the perplexing way that the Supreme Court of the United States chose to define Puerto Rico's status in the so-called "Insular Cases" of the early 20th century. Written over 100 years ago, this contradictory ruling looms large over Puerto Rico's precarious legal standing, despite the fact that there are now more Puerto Ricans living on the US mainland than in the island itself. Seeking to counter the obfuscation of Puerto Rico in the US imaginary, in this course students will analyze how key historical, political, and social moments connected to diasporas, disasters, and dissent have galvanized Puerto Rican cultural production in the 20th and 21st centuries.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: AMST 3717
class title: Sitcom Jews: Ethnic Representation on Television, 1948-Present
description: Jews have been on TV since the beginning of the medium – over 70 years – and have made decisions about how they are represented. What kind of Jews do we put on screen, and do they actually represent Jews in America? What about the representation of other ethnic and cultural groups? What can we learn from the history of Jewish television that might apply to Black, Latinx, Muslim, LGBTQ, Asian and other communities as they present themselves to the American public? "Sitcom Jews" uses media analysis, theoretical discussion, and student writing to examine a huge range of TV, starting with classic sitcoms ("The Goldbergs" (1948), "All in the Family, and "Bridget Loves Bernie"), continuing through current Jewish TV shows ("Broad City", "Transparent", "Curb Your Enthusiasm"), and adding a range of ethnic television ("The Jeffersons", "Black-ish", "Insecure", "Ramy", "Will &amp; Grace", "Never Have I Ever").
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3732
class title: Africans and African Americans in Literature
description: When an African and an African American meet, solidarity is presumed, but often friction is the result.  In this course, we will consider how Africans and African Americans see each other through literature.  What happens when two peoples suffering from double consciousness meet?  We will examine the influence of historical forces including slavery, colonialism and pan-Africanism on the way writers explore the meeting between Africans and African Americans. Specifically we will look at how writers and political figures such as Maya Angelou, Chimamanda Adichie, Richard Wright, Eugene Robinson, Philippe Wamba, Martin Luther King Junior and Malcolm X have understood the meeting.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3745
class title: Parody
description: In A Theory of Parody, Linda Hutcheon defines parody broadly as "repetition with critical difference, which marks difference rather than similarity." Taking a cue from Hutcheon, we will consider parody as a form of meaning making that is not necessarily used in the service of ridicule. Rather, we will examine a number of late-twentieth- and early-twenty-first-century imitative works in order to distinguish the rich variety of political agendas and aesthetic rationales for recent parody. An emphasis on postmodern or contemporary performances and media that renovate images, ideas, and icons from modernism and modernity will unite our otherwise diverse efforts. Some of these efforts will also highlight what happens when an artist takes up a work made for one platform (for example, theatre, performance art, installation, cinema, television, the Web) and parodies it in another. Creators and works under consideration may range from Christopher Durang, Split Britches, and Pig Iron Theatre Company to The Simpsons, Cookie's Fortune, and Strindberg and Helium.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 3775
class title: Latinos and the United States, 1492-1880
description: In this course, we will answer two major questions: What is Latino history? And how should we write Latino History? We will explore these questions without attempting to cover all of Latino history before 1800. We will focus on a variety of experiences to better understand how differences in race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, and class have shaped Latino communities over time. We will read academic journal articles and books (secondary sources) and documents from the past, such as diaries, letters, court records, and maps (primary sources). Throughout the semester we will be working in groups toward creating a final project: a Latino history website.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 3800
class title: Migration: Histories, Controversies, and Perspectives
description: This introductory course introduces students to issues and debates related to international migration and will provide an interdisciplinary foundation to understanding the factors that shape migration flows and migrant experiences. We will start by reviewing theories of the state and historical examples of immigrant racialization and exclusion in the United States and beyond. We will critically examine the notions of borders, citizenship/non-citizenship, and the creation of diasporas. Students will also hear a range of perspectives by exposing them to Cornell guest faculty who do research and teach on migration across different disciplines and methodologies and in different world areas. Examples include demographic researchers concerned with immigrant inequality and family formation, geographic perspectives on the changing landscapes of immigrant metropolises, legal scholarship on the rights of immigrant workers, and the study of immigrant culture from a feminist studies lens. Offered each fall semester.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 3980
class title: Independent Research
description: Affords opportunities for students to carry out independent research under appropriate supervision. Each student is expected to review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, conduct the research, and prepare a report. Topic and credit hours TBD as arranged between faculty and student.

class: AMST 3990
class title: Readings in American Studies
description: Individualized readings for junior and senior students. Topics, requirements, and credit hours will be determined in consultation between the student and the supervising faculty member.

class: AMST 4030
class title: Poetry in Process
description: Many distinguished poets have taught at Cornell. In this course we'll focus on three, all of them widely acclaimed: A. R. Ammons, Alice Fulton, Ishion Hutchinson. A. R. Ammons is best known for charting the interplay of scientific and spiritual phenomena, in poems ranging from brief lyrics to book-length epics written on adding machine tape. Alice Fulton, who was Ammons's student, carries on his interests in science and spirituality while bringing to them a distinctively feminist perspective. Born in Jamaica, Ishion Hutchinson writes poems that explore the fraught relations between geography and history in the light of colonial violence.  We'll survey each poet's work from earliest to most recent phases, paying special attention to their development of new techniques and original visions. Students may write poems as well as critical essays responding to the poets' work.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4203
class title: Contesting Votes: Democracy and Citizenship Throughout U.S. History
description: This advanced seminar traces transformations in citizenship and the franchise throughout U.S. history. Through readings, frequent short writings, discussion, and a final paper, the class examines the struggles over who can claim full citizenship and legitimate voice in the political community. It examines the divergent, often clashing, visions of legitimate democratic rule, focusing particularly on the debates over who should vote and on what terms.  We examine the dynamics that have shaped the boundaries of citizenship and hierarchies within it, paying attention to changes in the civic status of Native Americans, property-less white men, paupers, women, African Americans, various immigrant groups, residents of U.S. colonies, felons, and people with intellectual disabilities. A significant portion of the class focuses on debates about U.S. democracy in the decades after the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 4212
class title: Black Women's Autobiography in the 21st Century WritingHerStory
description: Black women first began to shape the genre of autobiography during antebellum era slavery. They were prolific in developing the genre of autobiography throughout the twentieth century, to the point of emerging as serial autobiographers in the case of Maya Angelou. Significantly, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1970), the first autobiography of six by Angelou, along with autobiographies by a range of other black women writers, helped to launch the renaissance in black women's literature and criticism in African American literature during the 1970s. In this course, we will focus on how black women have continued to write and share their personal stories in the new millennium by examining autobiographies that they have produced in the first years of the twenty-first century. More broadly, we will consider the impact of this writing on twenty-first century African American literature, as well as African diasporan writing in Africa and the Caribbean. In the process, we will draw on a range of critical and theoretical perspectives.  We will read memoirs and autobiographies by a range of figures, including Michelle Obama, Jennifer Lewis, Monica Coleman, Serena Williams, Gabrielle Union, and Tiffany Haddish, among others. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4262
class title: Environmental Justice: Past, Present, Future
description: "Environmental Justice" is a relatively recent term, coined in the United States in the 1980s.  It usually refers to a social movement fighting against the unfair concentration of toxic sites within impoverished communities of color.  As a broader set of ideas, though, "environmental justice" has a much longer history, going back at least to the 17th century in England, when poor farmers banded together to prevent common land from being enclosed for the exclusive use of the aristocracy.  This course explores that deep history, examining various overlaps between environmental thought and theories of social justice over the past 400 years in the western world.  It concludes with an examination of the current climate justice movement and a consideration of how environmental justice concerns are being played out in recent works of speculative fiction.  What do we owe to the climate refugees of our present day?  What do we owe to future generations?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 4533
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4627
class title: Contemporary Native American Fiction
description: If you haven't read contemporary U.S. American Indian fiction, then it might be fair to ask how much you know about the United States, its origins and its current condition. Since the 1960s, American Indians have been producing a significant body of award-wining novels and short stories. In 1969, for example, N. Scott Momaday, from the Kiowa nation, won the Pulitzer Prize for his novel House Made of Dawn and in 2012 Louise Erdrich, who is Anishinaabe, won the National Book Award for her novel The Round House. In between these two notable moments and since we can list an impressive number of Native storytellers whose work is aesthetically powerful, offering us a narrative of the United States that counters the official history. Centrally the course will focus on the various formal approaches Native writers take from surrealism to realism in representing the (post)colonial situation of Indian country and the ongoing resistance in Indian country to the U.S. legal and political regime.
outcome: Identify contemporary Indigenous writer and the genders they are writing in., Communicate the main theme in the discussed novels that relate to contemporary and historical issues in Indigenous communities, such as land rights, child welfare, protection of Indigenous women, Indigenous governance systems, construction of racial and colonial regimes, etc., Analyze historical and legal trends in Indigenous-federal relations., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4675
class title: The Environmental Imagination in American Literature
description: This course focuses on works that exemplify environmental consciousness—a sense that humans are not the center of the world and that to think they are may have catastrophic consequences for humans themselves. Environmental literature is not just a major strand of American literature but one of its most distinctive contributions to the literature of the world. We will be reading works mainly from the 19th and 20th centuries, both poetry and fiction, confronting the challenges of thinking and writing with an ecological consciousness in the 21st. Cornell being a rich environment in which to pursue such investigations, creative projects will be encouraged. Inspiration is assured.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: AMST 4851
class title: Refugees
description: Since World War II, over 4 million people have migrated to the United States as refugees. In this seminar we will examine some of these refugee migrations and the ways these migrations challenged our understanding of the United States as a "haven for the oppressed." We will examine the crafting of refugee/asylum policy, the role of nongovernmental actors in influencing policy, and the ways policy reflected foreign-policy interests and security concerns. The last weeks of the course will pay particular attention to climate refugees and asylum-seekers, and our changing definitions of who 'merits' protection in the United States.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: AMST 4993
class title: Honors Essay Tutorial I
description: To graduate with honors, AMST majors must complete a senior thesis under the supervision of an AMST faculty member and defend that thesis orally before a committee. Students interested in the honors program should consult the AMST Director of Undergraduate Study during the junior year and submit an honors application by May 1 of the junior year.

class: AMST 4998
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: AMST 6272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 

class: AMST 6510
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 

class: AMST 6695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).

class: ANSC 1101
class title: Contemporary Perspectives in Animal Science
description: This course offers an opportunity for incoming students to gain an appreciation for the range of issues and topics available in the Animal Science major. Faculty will present their current research and outreach activity as a means to engage students in current issues and to introduce possibilities for future research experience.
outcome: Identify research topics in Animal Science., Explain the breadth of contemporary issues in Animal Science., Investigate student opportunities such as student research, internships, and student organizations., 

class: ANSC 1130
class title: Introduction to Captive Raptor Husbandry
description: This course will provide students with an introduction to captive raptor management. The course structure will include a weekly classroom lecture and a complementary hands-on laboratory training session utilizing resident birds of prey and facilities of the Cornell Raptor Program. Topics of instruction will include natural history and adaptations of various bird of prey species, safe handling of captive raptors, nutritional requirements, health care, behavior and training, and the ethics of maintaining captive raptors. Course will include animal handling and chores related to raptor care.
outcome: Communicate basic knowledge of physiology and North American species, adaptations, physiology, habitat, and conservation status., Demonstrate and communicate the safe handling of birds of prey to minimize stress and potential injury to the bird and injury to the handler., Use behavioral cues and basic gear in the capture, restraint, and handling of birds of prey., Implement feeding strategies using basic nutritional requirements of birds of prey and management of nutrition and basic health care in captivity., Communicate ethical concerns and debates in maintaining captive birds of prey., Work efficiently and effectively in a group as a team member with equal contribution towards required material., Demonstrate an openness and respect for diverse backgrounds, opinions, and experiences towards subject matter., 

class: ANSC 1200
class title: Contemporary Dairy Industry Topics and Issues
description: This course is designed to expose students to current topics and issues in the U.S. and global dairy industry to create awareness and provide opportunities for developing critical thinking skills in problem solving related to dairy food production.
outcome: Discuss current topics and issues relevant to the dairy industry., Evaluate current topics and issues in the dairy industry as business opportunities and areas for growth., Analyze various aspects of dairy food production from an environmental, financial and ethical perspective., Use the concept of a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) analysis to evaluate opportunities in the dairy field., 

class: ANSC 1500
class title: Biology of Cats and Dogs: No Woof and Meow About It
description: The purpose of this course is to provide students with core principles of science through the study of cat and dog biology. The course is divided into three modules: 1) The evolution and genetics, 2) Physiology and life cycles, 3) Nutrition and energy requirements. The course will be a combination of short lectures, in-class exercises based on readings and lectures, weekly workshops to reflect and develop arguments related to material covered in lectures, and case-studies at the end of each module. This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
outcome: Use the basic principles of inheritance to assess impacts of selective breeding on cats and dogs., Compare and contrast the physiological systems and life cycles of cats and dogs., Explain the divergence in feeding strategies and nutrient requirements between cats and dogs based on their respective evolution., Interpret pet food labels., Generate arguments on controversial issues that relate to the evolution and biology of felids and canids (e.g., selective breeding and brachycephalic dogs, grain-free diets and misinformation, veganism and welfare of cats and dogs)., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: ANSC 2120
class title: Animal Nutrition
description: Introduction to animal nutrition, including digestive physiology and metabolism of domestic animals and other species, nutrient properties and requirements for different aspects of animal production and performance, and principles of feed evaluation and ration formulation. Laboratory classes include gastrointestinal tract dissections and nutritional experiments performed on laboratory or farm animal species.
outcome: Explain the principles of mammalian nutrition, including digestive physiology and metabolism., Determine basic nutrient requirements of livestock and other animal species, and how to meet those needs., Conduct animal nutritional experiments, collect and analyze data, and present results in oral and written formats., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1560 or equivalent.

class: ANSC 2170
class title: Public Communication in Animal Science
description: This course provides students an opportunity to enhance public literacy of animal agriculture using social media. Students will work as a team to (i) assess community gaps in knowledge of animal production through social media research and public community survey, (ii) interview animal scientists, farmers, or others within livestock industries to hear their perspective, (iii) develop a written narrative to provide scientific knowledge and clarity to a diverse community audience, (iv) critique their narration to identify potentially controversial dialogue and refine as necessary to ensure their communication is evidence-based, (v) audio record and edit their finalized narrative and integrate with pre-recorded interviews to create a "Ruminate On This" podcast episode, and (vi) develop alternative social media content (e.g., Twitter) to support their public engagement.
outcome: Utilize survey tools and personal engagement to acquire an understanding of the public perception of domestic animal production including alternative perspectives., Develop an ability to utilize science-based evidence to provide the public with accurate scientific information and address misconceptions., Effectively utilize written and oral communication of animal science to convey an important scientific message and improve animal science literacy to a diverse public audience., Identify our own gaps in knowledge and personal bias that has the potential to influence public-science dialogue., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of undergraduate biology (e.g., BIOMG 1350, BIOG 1440, or BIOG 1445).

class: ANSC 2300
class title: Introduction to Domestic Mammalian Behavior
description: An introduction to the behavior of domestic mammals and how behavior relates to management and welfare. Course explores both normal and abnormal behavior of farm and companion animal species. Some discussion of how these behaviors relate to animal welfare is involved but behavior, its development, and it purpose within and across species, is the main focus.
outcome: Summarize and compare categories of behavior (e.g. maternal behavior) between species, noting similarities and differences as well as proposing potential costs and benefits of the behavior(s)., Recognize and define "problem behaviors" and suggest potential causes and solutions for the behavior., Articulate general concepts related to mammalian behavior and the study of mammalian behavior., Critically evaluate peer-reviewed scientific articles by effectively reading, understanding, and analyzing the authors' findings and conclusions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 2500
class title: Dairy Cattle Principles
description: Introduction to the background and scientific principles relating to dairy cattle production. Laboratories are designed to provide an understanding of dairy cattle production.
outcome: Summarize and evaluate the common practices of dairy production in the United States., Articulate and appraise common social and ethical influences that steer the dairy industry., Discuss common and current economic conditions on dairy farms in the USA and globally as a mechanism to understand and evaluate how global events shape modern dairy production., 

class: ANSC 2550
class title: Dairy Study Trip to Italy
description: In this course, students will be introduced to the Italian dairy industry, the various cheeses produced in the country and the culture around the cheese related to the region of production. This course is the first part of a three-part course to complement ANSC 2551 (a 8-10 day trip to Italy) and ANSC 2552 (reflection of the trip and concepts learned).
outcome: Identify and assess various cheeses and describe how they are made and why they are different., Describe and compare cheese making techniques from different regions., Compare and contrast the regional protection mechanisms in place for various foods and wines in Italy and how that impacts regional and global marketing and production., Use historical and regional knowledge to develop a travel itinerary., Converse at a basic level in Italian., 

class: ANSC 2650
class title: Equine Biology and Management
description: Provides the basics of equine form, function, care, management, and handling. Students learn the basic biology of the horse and how to apply this knowledge to solve problems in horse care. Hands-on labs include safe handling techniques, basic groundwork, applied anatomy, and more. Short trips and tours illustrate applied concepts in the horse industry and equine health care.
outcome: Explain the basics of horse husbandry and use this information to formulate equine management decisions., Apply their knowledge of equine anatomy and physiology to management practices and equine health and disease., Gather and critically evaluate information to: understand and make decisions regarding horse care; present this information and make recommendations to peers and a lay audience., Demonstrate comfort and skill while handling and working with horses., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 3000
class title: Avian Physiology and Management
description: This course covers avian evolution and taxonomy, behavior, husbandry, and major physiological systems (e.g., skeletal, digestive, reproductive). Lecture material is reinforced with anatomical software and pigeon dissection lab. Use of avian model organisms in research is explored through study of scientific literature. Additional lectures explain the unique characteristics and management of different domesticated and exotic avian species. Students gain hands-on experience managing agricultural waterfowl through fieldtrips and the "Morrison's Fowl Farm" component of the course. Over the course of ten weeks, students perform chores and raise ducklings from two different breeds of duck selected for meat production. Students collect and analyze data for use in a final written research project in which they compare growth rate, carcass weight, and profitability of the two breeds.
outcome: Identify the major bones and muscles of the avian musculoskeletal system., Describe the anatomy and types of feathers and physical adaptations for flight., Identify the major organs of the reproductive, digestive, and excretory systems and describe their functions., Describe the techniques used in the husbandry and management of different species of birds., Use avian husbandry practices to care for and manage domesticated ducks., Compare and contrast unique adaptations, behaviors, and physiologies among the species covered., Collect and analyze data, interpret results, and communicate findings in a written report., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of general biology or physiology.

class: ANSC 3540
class title: Dairy Cattle Herd Health
description: This course will introduce students to dairy herd health concepts and strategies for achieving health, productivity, and profitability goals through management.  Health and performance monitoring by the use of dairy records, disease prevention, and evidence-based approaches to management will be stressed.  Students should expect to develop their knowledge of dairy cattle diseases and health, acquire skills for implementing dairy herd management programs, and strengthen their abilities to problem solve and communicate in group settings.
outcome: Demonstrate a basic understanding of health, disease, and performance in dairy cattle and replacements., Describe the most prevalent and highest impact health challenges in modern dairy production systems and understand management approaches for their prevention and control., Make economical, resourceful, and ethical decisions about health management in dairy herds., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2500 or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 3560
class title: International Dairy Study Trip
description: This course is designed to prepare students for the intensive 8-10 day study trip (ANSC 3561) designed for exposure to a variety of dairy related agricultural production approaches in the country of interest. Topics will include dairy management, environmental regulations, profitability, related government support programs and the role of cultures impact on production.
outcome: Describe the economics and conditions surrounding milk production in the country of interest and compare to the USA., Describe the consumer expectations for dairy production and produces and compare this to the USA., Explain resource limitations for dairy production systems and provide context for that relative to future food production within the country., 

class: ANSC 3800
class title: Sheep
description: Breeding, feeding, management, and selection of sheep. Lectures and laboratories are designed to give students practical knowledge of managing sheep for meat, milk, and wool production as well as the scientific background for improving management practices. Students spend several days during the semester feeding and caring for ewes and their newborn lambs and milking ewes in a dairy setting.
outcome: Students will acquire knowledge of sheep production and management., Students will gain experience through practice and simulation of management activities., 

class: ANSC 4110
class title: Integrated Cattle Nutrition
description: Integrates concepts of cattle nutrition and farm nutritional management to help students understand and appreciate factors influencing the performance of cattle under diverse conditions. Topics include the effect of environment on maintenance costs; the nutrient requirements for various stages of growth, lactation, and pregnancy; rumen function; feed composition and chemistry; nutrient partitioning; and the environmental impacts of cattle and how to minimize them. Computer models (Cornell Net Carbohydrate and Protein System) are used in the laboratory to actualize the information presented in lectures. Herd case studies are used in lab and there are field trips to farms to evaluate the nutritional management.
outcome: Cultivate skills for cattle diet construction and evaluation using software that allows for the determination of first limiting nutrients., Articulate how nutrient metabolism can affect health and productivity of cattle., Apply concepts of feed chemistry, microbial growth and rumen function to reduce the environmental impact of milk and meat production while optimizing economic productivity., Explain the metabolic regulation and change in nutrient requirements when animals move from one physiological state to another., Integrate quantitative thinking to nutritional problem solving and gain an appreciation for modeling approaches to solving problems in animal agriculture., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 and ANSC 2120, or equivalent.

class: ANSC 4200
class title: Nutrition of Cats and Dogs
description: The purpose of this course is to provide students with a solid foundation of knowledge on cat and dog nutrition to prepare them for careers in animal nutrition research, veterinary medicine, and the pet food industry. The course is divided into 5 modules. The first part of the course discusses ingredient and nutrient requirements of felids and canids by teaching students to integrate knowledge of evolutionary feeding habits, gastrointestinal anatomy, digestive processes, and nutrient metabolism. The second part covers practical feedings through the teaching of feed ingredient sourcing and processing, and the pet food manufacturing regulations. The third focusses on metabolic disorders of nutrient metabolism. Learning activities consist of daily student reflections, designing hypothesis-driven questions, discussing peer-reviewed articles, and presenting a final project.
outcome: Evaluate ingredient and nutrient adequacy of commercial foods for domestic felids and canids., Evaluate best feeding practices for a domestic felid and canid with a given common underlying metabolic disorder., Design a complete feed for a domestic felid and canid., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2120.

class: ANSC 4270
class title: Fundamentals of Endocrinology
description: Physiology and regulation of endocrine secretions. Emphasizes neuroendocrine, reproductive, growth, and metabolic aspects of endocrinology. Examples are selected from many animals, including humans.
outcome: Define the organization of the endocrine system with a focus on mammals., Explain the physiological function of major hormones and interactions among components of the endocrine system to control homeostasis., Describe the cellular source, biosynthesis, chemical nature, storage, factors controlling its secretion, cellular mechanisms of action on target cells, and physiological functions for each major hormone., Predict the consequences of disturbances in components of the endocrine system., Illustrate how basic scientific research as well as clinical studies of endocrine disorders contribute to the advancement of basic knowledge and development of therapeutic strategies for endocrine disorders., Appraise how the acquisition of knowledge about the endocrine system is ongoing and how key advances in technology from multiple fields (physiology, cell biology, biochemistry, and genetics) have promoted advancements in knowledge of the endocrine system., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or BIOG 1440, or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 4310
class title: Animal Genomics and Epigenomics
description: Animal Genomics and Epigenomics provides a foundation in functional genomics, epigenomics, and basic bioinformatics. It is designed to facilitate mastery of advanced techniques in genomics and their applications to animal biology, health, and production. The course consists of weekly lectures covering basic concepts and weekly workshops (computer labs or journal discussion). Workshops consist of exercises and discussions to provide students with hands-on experience performing basic genomic analyses. Students will become familiar with the UCSC genome browser, databases, and basic bioinformatic tools. Students will work in groups on a final project and develop research goals to study function(s) of a specific gene of interest.
outcome: Define basic animal genomic and epigenomic concepts., Explain the epigenetic reprogramming and regulation of gene expression., Recognize genome browsers, databases, and basic bioinformatics tools., Describe functional genomic and next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods, and their applications., Design a search for the gene of their interests and data from online databases., Appraise interesting questions in the field of animal genomic and discuss original research papers in animal genomics and epigenetics., Work within a group to propose interesting research ideas., Graduate students will be able to compose a written report with literature review and elements of experimental design on topics within the field., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2210 or equivalent genetics class.

class: ANSC 4510
class title: Dairy Herd Business Management
description: Emphasizes dairy herd business management with application to herd management analysis. Laboratory includes farm tours and analysis.
outcome: Develop critical thinking and verbal communication skills in business and financial decision making., Develop group-based business outcomes through classroom discussion and interaction in support of their decision-making process., Interact with dairy farm families and employees and analyze financial data to identify and solve real-life problems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2500 or equivalent, ANSC 3510, ANSC 3511, and AEM 3020, or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 4880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability,climate change, and economic development in the US, China, India, and other countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers ., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: ANSC 4960
class title: Internship in Animal Science
description: Structured, on-the-job learning experience under supervision of qualified professionals in a cooperating organization (e.g., farm, agribusiness, pharmaceutical company, zoo, educational institution). Internships are arranged by the student and must be approved in advance by the student's academic advisor. The internship should provide a professionally supervised experience with at least 60 hours on the job per credit required. All ANSC 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at cals.cornell.edu/academics/student-research/internship.

class: ANSC 4970
class title: Individual Study in Animal Science
description: May include individual tutorial study or a lecture topic selected by a professor. Because topics may change, the course may be repeated for credit.

class: ANSC 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching in Animal Science
description: Designed to consolidate the student's knowledge. A participating student assists in teaching a course allied with his or her education and experience. The student is expected to meet regularly with a discussion or laboratory section, to gain teaching experience, and regularly to discuss teaching objectives, techniques, and subject matter with the professor in charge.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: ANSC 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Animal Science
description: Affords opportunities for students to carry out independent research under appropriate supervision. Each student is expected to review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, conduct the research, and prepare a report.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: ANSC 5220
class title: MPS Professional Development Seminar
description: This course is designed to train students in the Master of Professional Studies program in communication and presentation skills needed for future careers. Each student will present several times on their capstone project. Advice, feedback, and peer-evaluation will be provided to each presenter. This course also aims to foster collegiality, expand knowledge, and promote professional development among graduate students in a broad context within this diverse field.
outcome: Create clear and organized presentations tailored to an audience., Communicate information clearly and effectively to an audience., 

class: ANSC 5310
class title: Animal Genomics and Epigenomics
description: Animal Genomics and Epigenomics provides a foundation in functional genomics, epigenomics, and basic bioinformatics. It is designed to facilitate mastery of advanced techniques in genomics and their applications to animal biology, health, and production. The course consists of weekly lectures covering basic concepts and weekly workshops (computer labs or journal discussion). Workshops consist of exercises and discussions to provide students with hands-on experience performing basic genomic analyses. Students will become familiar with the UCSC genome browser, databases, and basic bioinformatic tools. Students will work in groups on a final project and develop research goals to study function(s) of a specific gene of interest.
outcome: Define basic animal genomic and epigenomic concepts., Explain the epigenetic reprogramming and regulation of gene expression., Recognize genome browsers, databases, and basic bioinformatics tools., Describe functional genomic and next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods, and their applications., Design a search for the gene of their interests and data from online databases., Appraise interesting questions in the field of animal genomic and discuss original research papers in animal genomics and epigenetics., Work within a group to propose interesting research ideas., Graduate students will be able to compose a written report with literature review and elements of experimental design on topics within the field., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2210 or equivalent genetics class.

class: ANSC 5540
class title: Dairy Cattle Herd Health
description: This course will introduce students to dairy herd health concepts and strategies for achieving health, productivity, and profitability goals through management. Health and performance monitoring by the use of dairy records, disease prevention, and evidence-based approaches to management will be stressed. Students should expect to develop their knowledge of dairy cattle diseases and health, acquire skills for implementing dairy herd management programs, and strengthen their abilities to problem solve and communicate in group settings.
outcome: Demonstrate a basic understanding of health, disease, and performance in dairy cattle and replacements., Describe the most prevalent and highest impact health challenges in modern dairy production systems and understand management approaches for their prevention and control., Make economical, resourceful, and ethical decisions about health management in dairy herds., 

class: ANSC 6110
class title: Integrated Cattle Nutrition
description: Integrates concepts of cattle nutrition and farm nutritional management to help students understand and appreciate factors influencing the performance of cattle under diverse conditions. Topics include the effect of environment on maintenance costs; the nutrient requirements for various stages of growth, lactation, and pregnancy; rumen function; feed composition and chemistry; nutrient partitioning; and the environmental impacts of cattle and how to minimize them. Computer models (Cornell Net Carbohydrate and Protein System) are used in the laboratory to actualize the information presented in lectures. Herd case studies are used in lab and there are field trips to farms to evaluate the nutritional management.
outcome: Cultivate skills for cattle diet construction and evaluation using software that allows for the determination of first limiting nutrients., Articulate how nutrient metabolism can affect health and productivity of cattle., Apply concepts of feed chemistry, microbial growth and rumen function to reduce the environmental impact of milk and meat production while optimizing economic productivity., Explain the metabolic regulation and change in nutrient requirements when animals move from one physiological state to another., Integrate quantitative thinking to nutritional problem solving and gain an appreciation for modeling approaches to solving problems in animal agriculture., 

class: ANSC 6190
class title: Division of Nutritional Sciences Seminar
description: Lectures on current research in nutrition.

class: ANSC 6200
class title: Nutrition of Cats and Dogs
description: The purpose of this course is to provide students with a solid foundation of knowledge on cat and dog nutrition to prepare them for careers in animal nutrition research, veterinary medicine, and the pet food industry. The course is divided into 5 modules. The first part of the course discusses ingredient and nutrient requirements of felids and canids by teaching students to integrate knowledge of evolutionary feeding habits, gastrointestinal anatomy, digestive processes, and nutrient metabolism. The second part covers practical feedings through the teaching of feed ingredient sourcing and processing, and the pet food manufacturing regulations. The third focusses on metabolic disorders of nutrient metabolism. Learning activities consist of daily student reflections, designing hypothesis-driven questions, discussing peer-reviewed articles, and presenting a final project.
outcome: Evaluate ingredient and nutrient adequacy of commercial foods for domestic felids and canids., Evaluate best feeding practices for a domestic felid and canid with a given common underlying metabolic disorder., Design a complete feed for a domestic felid and canid., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANSC 2120.

class: ANSC 6220
class title: Graduate Student Research Updates
description: This course is designed to train Animal Science graduate students in communication/presentation skills needed to support a career in scientific research. Each student will present an update on research progress/plan towards his or her dissertation/thesis. Advice, feedback and peer-evaluation will be provided to each presenter. Focused discussions examining research areas of particular interest to each student on research methods, existing theories and/or controversies will be considered. This course also aims to foster collegiality, expand knowledge and promote professional development among graduate students in a broad context within this diverse field.
outcome: Improve oral presentation skills, organization, and delivery of their specific research topic to a diverse audience., Develop the confidence to clearly and succinctly communicate research findings to the scientific community., Hone interdisciplinary and critical thinking skills among Animal Science graduate students., Develop skills to critique (constructively) and scientifically interact with peers and departmental faculty., Get a broad perspective of Animal Science research by discussing diverse topics that are presented in this series (disciplinary knowledge)., 

class: ANSC 6230
class title: Reproductive Biology Journal Club
description: This course offers students with strong interest in reproductive biology a platform to extend the depth and breadth of their knowledge in reproductive science and technology. It also provides an opportunity for students to advance their critical assessment of current literature, and to practice scientific presentation in reproductive biology. 
outcome: Critically explain the strength and weakness of published research and literature., Effectively communicate analytical processes and their subsequent conclusions and predictions., 

class: ANSC 6270
class title: Fundamentals of Endocrinology
description: Physiology and regulation of endocrine secretions. Emphasizes neuroendocrine, reproductive, growth, and metabolic aspects of endocrinology. Examples are selected from many animals, including humans.
outcome: Define the organization of the endocrine system with a focus on mammals., Explain the physiological function of major hormones and interactions among components of the endocrine system to control homeostasis., Describe the cellular source, biosynthesis, chemical nature, storage, factors controlling its secretion, cellular mechanisms of action on target cells, and physiological functions for each major hormone., Predict the consequences of disturbances in components of the endocrine system., Illustrate how basic scientific research as well as clinical studies of endocrine disorders contribute to the advancement of basic knowledge and development of therapeutic strategies for endocrine disorders., Appraise how the acquisition of knowledge about the endocrine system is ongoing and how key advances in technology from multiple fields (physiology, cell biology, biochemistry, and genetics) have promoted advancements in knowledge of the endocrine system., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or BIOG 1440, or permission of instructor.

class: ANSC 6400
class title: Graduate-Level Individual Study in Animal Science
description: Graduate individual study in Animal Science under the direction of one or more faculty members.

class: ANSC 6510
class title: Dairy Herd Business Management
description: Emphasizes dairy herd business management with application to herd management analysis. Laboratory includes farm tours and analysis. 
outcome: Develop critical thinking and verbal communication skills in business and financial decision making., Develop group-based business outcomes through classroom discussion and interaction in support of their decision-making process., Interact with dairy farm families and employees and analyze financial data to identify and solve real-life problems., 

class: ANSC 6880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and one India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability, climate change, and economic development in the US and these two countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers., 

class: ANSC 7570
class title: Current Concepts in Reproductive Biology
description: For description and learning outcomes, see ANSC 7570.

class: ANSC 7900
class title: Graduate-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. students only before "A" exam has been passed.

class: ANSC 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for master's students.

class: ANSC 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. candidates after "A" exam has been passed.

class: ANTHR 1101
class title: FWS: Culture, Society, and Power
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is devoted to the anthropological study of the human condition. Anthropology examines all aspects of human experience, from the evolution of the species to contemporary challenges of politics, environment, and society. The discipline emphasizes empirically rich field research informed by sophisticated theoretical understandings of human social life and cultural production. The diversity of anthropology's interests provides a diverse array of stimulating opportunities to write critically about the human condition. Topics vary by semester.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ANTHR 1200
class title: Ancient Peoples and Places
description: A broad introduction to archaeology-the study of material remains to answer questions about the human past. Case studies highlight the variability of ancient societies and illustrate the varied methods and interpretive frameworks archaeologists use to reconstruct them. This course can serve as a platform for both archaeology and anthropology undergraduate majors.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 1400
class title: Introduction to Sociocultural Anthropology
description: Anthropology is the study of human beings. Sociocultural anthropology examines the practices, structures, and meanings that shape lived experience. But what does that mean? What do sociocultural anthropologists do, and how can their ways of knowing help us understand our interconnected world? This course introduces sociocultural anthropology—its methods, concepts, and characteristic ways of thinking. Together, we will examine how people live their lives: how we eat, work, play, and fight; how we bury our dead and care for our living; how we wield and acquiesce to power. Along the way, we will work to challenge Eurocentric models of human nature and human difference. And we will consider how anthropological tools can help address contemporary issues, from global health to climate change to racial justice.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 1700
class title: Indigenous North America
description: This course provides an interdisciplinary introduction to the diverse cultures, histories and contemporary situations of the Indigenous peoples of North America. Students will also be introduced to important themes in the post-1492 engagement between Indigenous and settler populations in North America and will consider the various and complex ways in which that history affected - and continues to affect - American Indian peoples and societies. Course materials draw on the humanities, social sciences, and expressive arts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ANTHR 1900
class title: Global Engagements: Living and Working in a Diverse World
description: How might we engage with communities, whether here in Ithaca or across the globe, in our diverse histories, experiences, and perspectives? What structural forces shape inequalities and how do communities go about addressing social and racial injustice? This course is designed to help students bring global engaged learning into their Cornell education with a focus on community engaged learning in Ithaca. It introduces skills that are vital for intercultural engagement, including participant-observation research, ethnographic writing, and the habits of critical reflexivity. Through readings, film, and community partnerships, we will learn about global/local issues including the gendered and racialized aspects of labor, food and housing insecurity, structural violence, and migration. Students will complete projects that help them learn with and from Ithaca community members and organizations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 2235
class title: Archaeology of Indigenous North America
description: This introductory course surveys archaeology's contributions to the study of American Indian cultural diversity and change in North America north of Mexico. Lectures and readings will examine topics ranging from the debate over when the continent was first inhabited to present-day conflicts between Native Americans and archaeologists over excavation and the interpretation of the past. We will review important archaeological sites such as Chaco Canyon, Cahokia, Lamoka Lake, and the Little Bighorn battlefield. A principal focus will be on major transformations in lifeways such as the adoption of agriculture, the development of political-economic hierarchies, and the disruptions that accompanied the arrival of Europeans to the continent.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ANTHR 2310
class title: The Natural History of Chimpanzees and the Origins of Politics
description: This course will examine the natural history of wild chimpanzees with an eye toward better understanding the changes that would have been necessary in human evolutionary history to promote the emergence of human culture and political life. After an overview of early research and preliminary attempts to apply our knowledge of chimpanzee life to social and political theory, the class will focus on our now extensive knowledge of chimpanzees derived from many ongoing, long-term field studies. Topics of particular interest include socialization, alliance formation and cooperation, aggression within and between the sexes, reconciliation, the maintenance of traditions, tool use, nutritional ecology and social organization, territorial behavior, and the importance of kin networks. The question of whether apes should have rights will also be explored.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ANTHR 2410
class title: South Asian Diaspora
description: This interdisciplinary course (with an emphasis in anthropology) will introduce students to the multiple routes/roots, lived experiences, and imagined worlds of South Asians who have traveled to various lands at different historical moments spanning Fiji, South Africa, Mauritius, Britain, Malaysia, United States, Trinidad, and even within South Asia itself such as the Tamil-speaking population of Sri Lanka. The course will begin with the labor migrations of the 1830s and continue up to the present period. The primary exercise will be to compare and contrast the varied expressions of the South Asian Diaspora globally in order to critically evaluate this transnational identity. Thus, we will ask what, if any, are the ties that bind a fifth-generation Indo-Trinidadian whose ancestor came to the New World as an indentured laborer or "coolie" in the mid-19th century to labor in the cane fields, to a Pakistani medical doctor who migrated to the United States in the late 1980s. If Diaspora violates a sense of identity based on territorial integrity, then could "culture" serve as the basis for a shared identity?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 2420
class title: Nature-Culture: Ethnographic Approaches to Human Environment Relations
description: One of the most pressing questions of our time is how we should understand the relationship between nature, or the environment, and culture, or society, and whether these should be viewed as separate domains at all. How one answers this question has important implications for how we go about thinking and acting in such diverse social arenas as environmental politics, development, and indigenous-state relations. This course serves as an introduction to the various ways anthropologists and other scholars have conceptualized the relationship between humans and the environment and considers the material and political consequences that flow from these conceptualizations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 2424
class title: Culture and Mental Health: Anthropological Perspectives
description: Global Mental Health is a growing and important field within the general category of Global Public Health. Anthropology has an established and long history of contributing to the debates about cross-cultural psychiatry and psychotherapy, as well as to the perennial questions of nature versus nurture in defining normal versus pathological ways of being human. Cross-cultural explanations for varied and/or universal forms of human subjectivity, affect, and personality are increasingly relevant given new research into neurological plasticity, genomics, and the dissemination and practice of evidence-based and pharmaceutically-oriented psychiatry at the expense of more holistic and culturally nuanced forms of care. We examine the efficacy of traditional and community-based mental health practices in non-Western contexts as well as the challenges to accessibile care posed by inequality and precarity, as well as the stigmas surrounding mental illness in varied cultural contexts.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 2437
class title: Economy, Power, and Inequality
description: How do humans organize production, distribution, exchange, and consumption? What social, political, environmental, and religious values underlie different forms of economic organization? And how do they produce racial, ethnic, class, gender, and sexual inequalities? This course uses a range of historical and contemporary case studies to address these questions, in the process introducing a range of analytic approaches including formalism, substantivism, Marxist and feminist theory, critical race studies, and science and technology studies. Course themes include gifts and commodities; the nature of money, markets, and finance; credit and debt relations; labor, property, and value; licit and illicit economies; capitalism and socialism; development and underdevelopment.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3000
class title: Introduction to Anthropological Theory
description: This seminar course is designed to give anthropology majors an introduction to classical and contemporary social and anthropological theory and to help prepare them for upper-level seminars in anthropology. The seminar format emphasizes close reading and active discussion of key texts and theorists. The reading list will vary from year to year but will include consideration of influential texts and debates in 19th-, 20th-, and 21st-century anthropological theory especially as they have sought to offer conceptual and analytical tools for making sense of human social experience and cultural capacities.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3110
class title: Documentary Production Fundamentals
description: This introductory course familiarizes students with documentary filmmaking and audiovisual modes of knowledge production. Through lectures, screenings, workshops, and labs, students will develop single-camera digital video production and editing skills. Weekly camera, sound, and editing exercises will enhance students' documentary filmmaking techniques and their reflexive engagement with sensory scholarship. Additionally, students will be introduced to nonfiction film theory from the perspective of production and learn to critically engage and comment on each other's work. Discussions of debates around visual ethnography, the politics of representation, and filmmaking ethics will help students address practical storytelling dilemmas. Over the course of the semester, students conduct pre-production research and develop visual storytelling skills as they build a portfolio of short video assignments in preparation for continued training in documentary production.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3200
class title: Heritage Forensics
description: This course provides students with an orientation to the new technologies reshaping the effort to preserve cultural heritage. The course introduces students to the tools that Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing (especially aerial and satellite imaging) provide for advancing heritage preservation and detecting cultural erasure. Our focus will be on contexts where heritage has emerged as a site of conflict, from Bosnia to Syria to Ukraine. Students will develop proficiency in a range of spatial technologies and their application to the human past. The course will culminate in projects that use new technologies to save heritage at risk. 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3402
class title: Social Justice: Special Topics
description: Social Justice highlights refugee-led organizing and its intersections with un/documented and Indigenous beyond borders activism. We will work with and learn from refugee and asylum seekers led organizations that are started by and run by members of formerly displaced groups. These organizations build collectives and coalitions to organize communities across identities and legal categories and advocate for access to mobility and social justice. We will closely collaborate with these organizations and work on joint research projects.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 3411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 3416
class title: The Barbarians
description: The idea of the barbarians is as old as civilization itself. But what is a barbarian, and what is the role that barbarians play, as the savage enemies of civilization? In this course we will address such questions by looking at how different civilizations have imagined their barbarians, ranging from their key role in Greek drama, and as infidels in religious conceptions, to Chinese walls, and American savagery. We will examine both historical examples, and the barbarians of today -- the terrorists and insurgents so often framed as dark and primitive, in contrast with ourselves. Through readings and visual materials, we will seek to discover what these barbarians have in common. We will look comparatively for the underlying patterns of history that the barbarians are drafted from, to draw a new picture of the barbarians. At the same time, we will arrive at a new understanding of civilization as such, as well as of the general nature of human inequality, and how it is justified.   
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some familiarity with issues and debates in anthropology, and/or social sciences generally.

class: ANTHR 3474
class title: Infrastructure
description: Infrastructure! It's the hardware and software that undergirds transportation, energy, water, and security systems. This course asks what we can learn about infrastructure when we approach it not as a neutral set of technologies but as a context-dependent social and political force. Taking a critical approach to (among others) natural resources, labor, housing, and security, the course will trace how infrastructures have both served and obstructed colonial and contemporary projects for social change.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANTHR 1101.

class: ANTHR 3520
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ANTHR 3680
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective?  Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: ANTHR 4200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: ANTHR 4246
class title: Human Osteology
description: This is an intensive laboratory course in the study of human skeletal remains. A detailed knowledge of skeletal anatomy is fundamental to forensic anthropology, bioarchaeology, and the medical sciences. This course teaches students how to identify all 206 bones and 32 teeth of the human skeleton, in both complete and fragmentary states. Students will also learn osteological methods for establishing a biological profile and documenting skeletal trauma and pathological lesions. Hands-on laboratory training will be supplemented by case studies that demonstrate the importance of human osteology for criminal investigations in the present and the study of health and violence in the past. The ethics of working with human remains are also discussed.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ANTHR 4256
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: An introduction to belief systems in ancient Mexico and Central America, emphasizing the blending of religion, astrology, myth, history, and prophecy. Interpreting text and image in pre-Columbian books and inscriptions is a major focus.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4402
class title: Anthropology of Education
description: This seminar examines public schools and other educational spaces as sites where knowledge, learning, learner, and identities are produced and contested. It explores how power and cultural norms work in educational settings, and the unintended teaching and learning that happens outside the purported curriculum. Topics include issues of multiculturalism and pluralism in schools and society, the school achievement of racial and ethnic minorities, youth cultures and identities, and literacy in adult learning spaces. This course is for students interested in the advanced study of multicultural schooling and education.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4403
class title: Ethnographic Field Methods
description: This course is designed to give advanced undergraduate and graduate students a practical understanding of what anthropologists actually do in what has traditionally been understood as the field, a construction that has been contested. We will examine situations that emerge in conducting fieldwork, and explore the ethical, methodological, theoretical, epistemological, and practical issues that are raised in the observation, participation in, recording, and representation of sociocultural processes and practices. Students are expected to develop a semester-long, local research project that will allow them to experience fieldwork situations.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4442
class title: Toxicity
description: Identifying and managing the toxic is critical to medical and environmental sciences as well as techniques of governing and resisting. This course takes up the subject of toxicity as a field of expertise, an object of knowledge and ethical substance. We will consider the specific histories of industrialization and of the sciences that shape modern engagements with toxicity, and we will explore other ways that the sorts of harms, poisons, and powers glossed as toxicity have been articulated. Over the course of the semester, students will develop the skills to provincalizing relations between toxicity, remedy and memory. Texts will draw from social theory, anthropology, science and technology studies and history as well as art and activism.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a previous class in the humanities or interpretive social sciences, preferably in anthropology or science and technology studies.

class: ANTHR 4466
class title: Citizenship, Borders, and Belonging
description: How is citizenship both an ideal of formal equality as well as a mechanism for the elaboration of social inequity? Although the concept of citizenship is premised on liberal ideals of enfranchisement, the rise of xenophobic nationalisms globally have revealed the very notion of citizenship to be an exclusionary category of belonging. Introducing students to classic and contemporary theories of citizenship, this course examines both the contradictions in the theoretical underpinnings of citizenship that set up binaries of citizen and non-citizen, as well as the proliferation of documentary regimes that try to identify who is NOT a citizen. Questioning universal conceptualizations of citizenship which foreground the individual as the locus of rights and recognition, we will discuss anthropological approaches to understanding how people struggle for legal recognition and social belonging as members of collectivities. The thematic focus of the course will be borders, though materials will be drawn from other areas as well. 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one course in Sociocultural Anthropology.

class: ANTHR 4610
class title: Environmental Justice and the Middle East
description: This course introduces students to the study of environmental justice through the Middle East. We cover long-standing environmental emerging from fossil fuel extraction, drought, colonialism, and desertification; contemporary problems of climate change mitigation, green cities, and sustainable agricultural technology; and questions raised by the growing power of the Gulf states and their involvement in a range of environmental issues, from land grabs in Sudan to the control of water in Arizona. We will begin with key texts about environmental justice, before moving into case studies—consisting of academic work, journalism, and other media—to explore different aspects of environmental justice.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ANTHR 4733
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4774
class title: Indigenous Spaces and Materiality
description: The materiality of art as willful agents will be considered from ontology to an Indigenous expression of "more than human relations." Located at the intersection of multiple modernities, art and science; the shift from art historical framings of form over matter and connoisseurship to viewing materiality as an active process that continues to map larger social processes and transformation will be discussed. Archives will be sites of investigation across varied Indigenous geographies marking place, space, bodies and land. This class is designed to introduce the latest methodologies in the field of art history, material culture and Indigenous Studies. Students will consult the archive, do hands-on evaluation of art, material culture, and expand their historic and theoretical knowledge about materiality. Beyond the theoretically and historically grounded critique this class provides, it will also introduce students to working with original documents and / or conduct on-site research. Students will consult the Cornell University library holdings of the Huntington Free Library's Native American Collection and conduct original archival research with historic and contemporary art and material culture at Haudenosaunee cultural centers, museums and exhibitions spaces through a class trip or individual visits (TBD).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ANTHR 4910
class title: Independent Study: Undergrad I
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 4920
class title: Independent Study: Undergrad II
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 4983
class title: Honors Thesis Research
description: Research work supervised by the thesis advisor, concentrating on determination of the major issues to be addressed by the thesis, preparation of literature reviews, analysis of data, and the like. The thesis advisor will assign the grade for this course.

class: ANTHR 4991
class title: Honors Workshop I
description: Course will consist of several mandatory meetings of all thesis writers with the honors chair. These sessions will inform students about the standard thesis production timetable, format and content expectations, and deadlines; expose students to standard reference sources; and introduce students to each other's projects. The chair of the Honors Committee will assign the grade for this course.

class: ANTHR 6020
class title: History of Anthropological Thought
description: This course examines the history and development of anthropology as a discipline with emphasis on British social anthropology and American cultural anthropology. The course will trace major schools of thought -- Evolutionism, Functionalism, and Structuralism -- leading to the post-structural critique of culture. The latter part of the course will examine a range of  debates around anthropology's method and claims to theory beginning with the reflexive turn. Specifically, this part of the course will address how the recognition by anthropologists of the operations of power both in the world out there and within anthropology has led to diverse methodologies and theories that define contemporary anthropology.

class: ANTHR 6110
class title: Documentary Production Fundamentals
description: This introductory course familiarizes students with documentary filmmaking and audiovisual modes of knowledge production. Through lectures, screenings, workshops, and labs, students will develop single-camera digital video production and editing skills. Weekly camera, sound, and editing exercises will enhance students' documentary filmmaking techniques and their reflexive engagement with sensory scholarship. Additionally, students will be introduced to nonfiction film theory from the perspective of production and learn to critically engage and comment on each other's work. Discussions of debates around visual ethnography, the politics of representation, and filmmaking ethics will help students address practical storytelling dilemmas. Over the course of the semester, students conduct pre-production research and develop visual storytelling skills as they build a portfolio of short video assignments in preparation for continued training in documentary production.

class: ANTHR 6230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.

class: ANTHR 6403
class title: Ethnographic Field Methods
description: This course is designed to give advanced undergraduate and graduate students a practical understanding of what anthropologists actually do in what has traditionally been understood as the field, a construction that has been contested. We will examine situations that emerge in conducting fieldwork, and explore the ethical, methodological, theoretical, epistemological, and practical issues that are raised in the observation, participation in, recording, and representation of sociocultural processes and practices. Students are expected to develop a semester-long, local research project that will allow them to experience fieldwork situations.

class: ANTHR 6411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.

class: ANTHR 6416
class title: The Barbarians
description: The idea of the barbarians is as old as civilization itself. But what is a barbarian, and what is the role that barbarians play, as the savage enemies of civilization? In this course we will address such questions by looking at how different civilizations have imagined their barbarians, ranging from their key role in Greek drama, and as infidels in religious conceptions, to Chinese walls, and American savagery. We will examine both historical examples, and the barbarians of today -- the terrorists and insurgents so often framed as dark and primitive, in contrast with ourselves. Through readings and visual materials, we will seek to discover what these barbarians have in common. We will look comparatively for the underlying patterns of history that the barbarians are drafted from, to draw a new picture of the barbarians. At the same time, we will arrive at a new understanding of civilization as such, as well as of the general nature of human inequality, and how it is justified.   
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some familiarity with issues and debates in anthropology, and/or social sciences generally.

class: ANTHR 6474
class title: Infrastructure
description: Infrastructure! It's the hardware and software that undergirds transportation, energy, water, and security systems. This course asks what we can learn about infrastructure when we approach it not as a neutral set of technologies but as a context-dependent social and political force. Taking a critical approach to (among others) natural resources, labor, housing, and security, the course will trace how infrastructures have both served and obstructed colonial and contemporary projects for social change.

class: ANTHR 6520
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ANTHR 6680
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective? Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.

class: ANTHR 7139
class title: Global Currents: Immobility and Multi-Sited Ethnography
description: Ever-increasing global interconnection drives some of the most pressing political and ethical questions of our time. This seminar centers on two intersecting areas of inquiry. The first deals with the nature of global movements: how people, ideas, arts, and capital move through world. Engaging postcolonial theory and scholarship on contemporary migration and transnationalism, we will interrogate the idea of borders and nations as well as those categories—like diaspora—that surpass or circumvent them. The second addresses how and why we might study these processes ethnographically. Here we will consider the potential and limitations of multi-sited and global ethnography, and question the possibility of an activist ethnography of global interconnection.

class: ANTHR 7200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: ANTHR 7246
class title: Human Osteology
description: This is an intensive laboratory course in the study of human skeletal remains. A detailed knowledge of skeletal anatomy is fundamental to forensic anthropology, bioarchaeology, and the medical sciences. This course teaches students how to identify all 206 bones and 32 teeth of the human skeleton, in both complete and fragmentary states. Students will also learn osteological methods for establishing a biological profile and documenting skeletal trauma and pathological lesions. Hands-on laboratory training will be supplemented by case studies that demonstrate the importance of human osteology for criminal investigations in the present and the study of health and violence in the past. The ethics of working with human remains are also discussed.

class: ANTHR 7250
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: Explores the ways Mesoamericans understood the world and their place in it, and the ways they constructed history as these are reflected in the few books that have survived from the period before the European invasion. Examines the structure of writing and systems of notation, especially calendars, and considers their potential for illuminating Mesoamerican world views and approaches to history. Primary focus is detailed analysis of five precolumbian books: Codex Borgia, a central Mexican manual of divinatory ritual; Codex Boturini, a history of migration in central Mexico; Codex Nuttall, a Mixtec dynastic history; and two Maya books of astrology and divination, Codex Dresden and Codex Madrid.

class: ANTHR 7272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 

class: ANTHR 7402
class title: Anthropology of Education
description: This seminar examines public schools and other educational spaces as sites where knowledge, learning, learner, and identities are produced and contested. It explores how power and cultural norms work in educational settings, and the unintended teaching and learning that happens outside the purported curriculum. Topics include issues of multiculturalism and pluralism in schools and society, the school achievement of racial and ethnic minorities, youth cultures and identities, and literacy in adult learning spaces. This course is for students interested in the advanced study of multicultural schooling and education.

class: ANTHR 7442
class title: Toxicity
description: Identifying and managing the toxic is critical to medical and environmental sciences as well as techniques of governing and resisting. This course takes up the subject of toxicity as a field of expertise, an object of knowledge and ethical substance. We will consider the specific histories of industrialization and of the sciences that shape modern engagements with toxicity, and we will explore other ways that the sorts of harms, poisons, and powers glossed as toxicity have been articulated. Over the course of the semester, students will develop the skills to provincalizing relations between toxicity, remedy and memory. Texts will draw from social theory, anthropology, science and technology studies and history as well as art and activism. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a previous class in the humanities or interpretive social sciences, preferably in anthropology or science and technology studies.

class: ANTHR 7466
class title: Citizenship, Borders, and Belonging
description: How is citizenship both an ideal of formal equality as well as a mechanism for the elaboration of social inequity? Although the concept of citizenship is premised on liberal ideals of enfranchisement, the rise of xenophobic nationalisms globally have revealed the very notion of citizenship to be an exclusionary category of belonging. Introducing students to classic and contemporary theories of citizenship, this course examines both the contradictions in the theoretical underpinnings of citizenship that set up binaries of citizen and non-citizen, as well as the proliferation of documentary regimes that try to identify who is NOT a citizen. Questioning universal conceptualizations of citizenship which foreground the individual as the locus of rights and recognition, we will discuss anthropological approaches to understanding how people struggle for legal recognition and social belonging as members of collectivities. The thematic focus of the course will be borders, though materials will be drawn from other areas as well. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one course in Sociocultural Anthropology.

class: ANTHR 7520
class title: Southeast Asia: Readings in Special Problems
description: Independent reading course on topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 7530
class title: South Asia: Readings in Special Problems
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 7550
class title: East Asia: Readings in Special Problems
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 7774
class title: Indigenous Spaces and Materiality
description: The materiality of art as willful agents will be considered from ontology to an Indigenous expression of "more than human relations." Located at the intersection of multiple modernities, art and science; the shift from art historical framings of form over matter and connoisseurship to viewing materiality as an active process that continues to map larger social processes and transformation will be discussed. Archives will be sites of investigation across varied Indigenous geographies marking place, space, bodies and land. This class is designed to introduce the latest methodologies in the field of art history, material culture and Indigenous Studies. Students will consult the archive, do hands-on evaluation of art, material culture, and expand their historic and theoretical knowledge about materiality. Beyond the theoretically and historically grounded critique this class provides, it will also introduce students to working with original documents and / or conduct on-site research. Students will consult the Cornell University library holdings of the Huntington Free Library's Native American Collection and conduct original archival research with historic and contemporary art and material culture at Haudenosaunee cultural centers, museums and exhibitions spaces through a class trip or individual visits (TBD).

class: ANTHR 7900
class title: Department of Anthropology Colloquium
description: A series of workshops and lectures on a range of themes in the discipline sponsored by the Department of Anthropology. Presentations include lectures by invited speakers, debates featuring prominent anthropologists from across the globe, and works in progress presented by anthropology faculty and graduate students.

class: ANTHR 7910
class title: Independent Study: Grad I
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 7920
class title: Independent Study: Grad II
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ANTHR 7930
class title: Independent Study: Grad III
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ARAB 1201
class title: Elementary Arabic I
description: This two-course sequence assumes no previous knowledge of Arabic and provides a thorough grounding in the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. It starts with the alphabet and the number system and builds the four skills gradually and systematically through carefully selected and organized materials focusing on specific, concrete and familiar topics such as self identification, family, travel, food, renting an apartment, study, the weather, etc.). These topics are listed in the textbook's table of contents.  The student who successfully completes the two-course sequence will have mastered about 1000 basic words and will be able to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations on a limited range of practical topics such as self-identification, family, school, work, the weather, travel, etc., 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, passages of up to 180 words written in Arabic script, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 50-word paragraph in Arabic.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Novice to the Intermediate Mid level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ARAB 1203
class title: Intermediate Arabic I
description: In this two-course sequence learners continue to develop the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing and grammar foundation through the extensive use of graded materials on a wide variety of topics.  While more attention is given to developing native-like pronunciation and to grammatical accuracy than in ARAB 1201 and ARAB 1202, the main focus of the course will be on encouraging fluency and facility in understanding the language and communicating ideas in it.  The student who successfully completes this two-course sequence will have mastered over 1500 new words and will be able to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations related to a wide variety of topics beyond those covered in ARAB 1201 and ARAB 1202, such as the history and geography of the Arab world, food and health, sports, economic matters, the environment, politics, the Palestine problem, etc. 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, passages of up to 300 words, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 150-word paragraph in Arabic with fewer grammatical errors than in ARAB 1202.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Intermediate Mid to the Advanced Mid level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of Arabic or permission of instructor.

class: ARAB 2201
class title: Arabic for Heritage Speakers
description: This course is designed for students who can speak and understand a spoken Arabic dialect (Egyptian, Lebanese, Syrian, Iraqi, etc.) but have little or no knowledge of written Arabic, known as Classical Arabic, Modern Standard Arabic, or Fusha. The focus of the course will be on developing the reading and writing skills through the use of graded, but challenging and interesting materials. As they develop their reading and writing skills, students will be learning about Arab history, society, and culture. Classroom activities will be conducted totally in Arabic. Students will not be expected or pressured to speak in Classical Arabic, but will use their own dialects for speaking purposes. However, one of the main goals of the course will be to help the development of the skills to communicate and understand Educated Spoken Arabic, a form of Arabic that is based on the spoken dialects but uses the educated vocabulary and structures of Fusha.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARAB 3201
class title: Advanced Arabic I
description: In this two-semester sequence, learners will be introduced to authentic, unedited Arabic language materials ranging from short stories, and poems, to newspaper articles dealing with social,  political,  and cultural issues. Emphasis will be on developing fluency in oral expression through discussions of issues presented in the reading and listening selections. There will be more focus on the development of native-like pronunciation and accurate use of grammatical structures than in the previous four courses. A primary objective of the course is the development of the writing skill through free composition exercises in topics of interest to individual students.  This course starts where ARAB 2202 leaves off and continues the development of the four language skills and grammar foundation using 18 themes, some new and some introduced in previous courses but are presented here at a more challenging level.  The student who successfully completes this two-course sequence have mastered over 3000 new words and will be able, within context of the 18 new and recycled themes to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations, 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, authentic, unedited passages of up to 400 words, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 300-word paragraph in Arabic with fewer grammatical errors than in ARAB 2202.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Advanced Mid to the Superior level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARAB 2202 or permission of instructor.

class: ARAB 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Arabic
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: ARCH 1101
class title: Design I
description: Introduction to design as a conceptual discipline directed at the analysis, interpretation, synthesis, and transformation of the physical environment. Exercises are aimed at developing an understanding of the issues, elements, and processes of environmental design.

class: ARCH 1301
class title: Introduction to Architecture
description: Intended to familiarize non-architecture students with the art and science of architecture. The fundamentals of plan, section, and elevation, the primary elements that comprise an architectural form; basic organizational principles; the ways in which we perceive architectural space; and the various concepts of function in relation to form will be included among the topics to be covered, using examples from numerous times and cultures as well as from contemporary Cornell campus.

class: ARCH 1501
class title: Representation I: Freehand Architectural Drawing
description: Introduction to freehand drawing as an analytical tool within the design process.

class: ARCH 1611
class title: Environmental Systems I: Introduction to Sustainable Design
description: This course examines the relationships between building, site, landscape and sustainability through the lens of ecology and systems thinking. Topics include: basic concepts of sustainability, energetic processes, climate, spatial data visualization, global warming, solar geometry, landscape processes, microclimates, site strategies and grading, building footprint &amp; sustainable building metrics.

class: ARCH 1901
class title: FWS: Topics in Architecture
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is devoted to topics related to architecture.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ARCH 2101
class title: Design III
description: Students develop an understanding of context and precedent in the construction of architectural form, and are introduced to contextual and programmatic densities in addition to circulatory, spatial, and organizational strategies in the design process.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1102. 

class: ARCH 2502
class title: Representation II: Media of Representation
description: The understanding of representational and fabrication techniques as generative tools in the design process.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1501 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 2613
class title: Structural Systems
description: Behavior and design of overall structural systems for buildings. Particular focus on systems used for resisting lateral loads (rigid frames, braced frames and shear walls) and for spanning long distances (trusses and space frames; cables and membranes; and arches, domes, and shells).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1612.

class: ARCH 2802
class title: History of Architecture II
description: The history of the built environment as social and cultural expression from more recent times to the present. Architecture and urban design themes, theories, and ideas are addressed in greater detail leading to the present time.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801.

class: ARCH 3101
class title: Design V
description: Design and development of complex architectural projects situated in urban contexts and developed with regard to program, site, building, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1611, ARCH 1612, ARCH 2613, ARCH 2614, ARCH 2616, and ARCH 2102. 

class: ARCH 3102
class title: Design VI
description: Design and development of complex architectural projects situated in urban contexts and developed with regard to program, site, building, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 3101. 

class: ARCH 3105
class title: NOMA Student Design Competition
description: In this class, a group of students form a design team that competes in the NOMA Student Design Competition in response to a specific brief.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1101 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 3117
class title: Contemporary Italian Culture - Italian Cinema
description: This course examines the cinematic representation of Italy with particular emphasis to the use of settings and space. We will explore how the visions of urban and rural spaces reflect the evolving cultural, social and political fabric of a nation in a period of rapid and often traumatic historical change. The course will feature screening of films set in several Italian locations, from Rome to Milan, from Naples to Venice, from Sicily to the Apennines, and represent different moments of Italian contemporary history. We will take advantage of the unique opportunity to study this cinema while residing in Rome and traveling in Italy, through the experience of the real settings that have figured so prominently in Italian cinema. Each session consists of an in-class lecture and a film screening. The course will also include one or two guest lecturers each semester.

class: ARCH 3197
class title: Special Investigations in Architectural Design
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1101, ARCH 1102, ARCH 2101, and ARCH 2102.

class: ARCH 3301
class title: Architectural Analysis II: Architecture, the City, and Landscape
description: Agendas and approaches to the making and reading of urban conditions and landscape designs. The analysis of canonical works and texts, with emphasis on architecture within and without the city as vehicles of study, and with frequent reference to urban and landscape theories and designs, as well as to representations of the city and garden from other media and disciplines.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2301 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 3308
class title: Special Topics in the Theory of Architecture I
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Theory of Architecture. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2301 and ARCH 3301 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 3397
class title: Special Investigations in the Theory of Architecture I
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2301. Prerequisite or Corequisite: ARCH 3301.

class: ARCH 3497
class title: Special Investigations in Architecture, Culture, and Society
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801 and ARCH 2802.

class: ARCH 3702
class title: Visual Imaging in the Electronic Age
description: Interdisciplinary survey course designed to introduce students in the creative arts, science, and engineering to the concepts of 2D and 3D digital pictorial representation and display. It is a concept course that concentrates on "why" rather than "how." Topics include perspective representations, display technology, how television works, bandwidth concepts, digital photography, computer graphics modeling and rendering, color perception, 3D data acquisition, volumetric imaging, and historical precedents, primarily from the art world.
distribution categories: (MQR-AAP)

class: ARCH 3819
class title: Special Topics in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of History of Architecture and Urbanism. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801 and ARCH 2802 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 3820
class title: The Topography and Urban History of Rome in Antiquity and the Middle Ages
description: Rome is a prisoner of its past. The entire city confronts the student with almost 30 centuries of urban and architectural history. This course intends to reconstruct the urban history of Rome from its origins through the Middle Ages (10th century bc-12th century ad). The purpose of this course will be to discover the layers of Rome, combining archaeology with literature, architecture, and urban history with art history. The goal is a thorough and direct knowledge of the Roman and Medieval urban landscape and the way this landscape has sometimes survived until today. Special attention will be given to Roman and Medieval building typology, both private and public, and the development of the urban infrastructure (street system, water supply, fortifications, etc.). Strong emphasis will be placed upon continuity, use/reuse, and transformation of buildings and spaces, etc. Every week one or two different "regions" will be explored that are typical for a particular moment of the urban history. Visits to sites outside Rome also will be used to address the issue of urban history in Italy in antiquity and the Middle Ages.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ARCH 3823
class title: Urban Design, Architecture, and Art in Renaissance and Baroque Rome
description: This course focuses on the Renaissance and Baroque phases (15th-18th centuries) of Rome's history. The first class sessions will survey the city's urban history and form from its origins to the present, and we will often turn our attention to earlier and later developments, without an understanding of which the Renaissance and Baroque periods would be only partially intelligible. While the history of urban and architectural design will be our main focus, we will also look at key episodes of painting and sculpture, especially by artists who are also among the principal  architects of these periods (Michelangelo, Bernini).
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801 and ARCH 2802, or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 3897
class title: Special Investigations in History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801 and ARCH 2802.

class: ARCH 4101
class title: Design VII
description: Advanced programs in architectural design, with options in, but not limited to, urban design, architectural technology, computational design, ecology, culture, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1801, ARCH 2302, ARCH 2802, ARCH 3102, ARCH 3301, and ARCH 3615. 

class: ARCH 4102
class title: Design VIII
description: Advanced programs in architectural design, with options including, but not limited to, urban design, architectural technology, computational design, ecology, culture, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4101.

class: ARCH 4408
class title: Special Topics in Architecture, Culture, and Society
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Architecture, Culture and Society. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.

class: ARCH 4508
class title: Special Investigations in Visual Representation
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1501, ARCH 2502.

class: ARCH 4509
class title: Special Topics in Visual Representation I
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Visual Representation. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1501 and ARCH 2502, or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 4601
class title: Ecological Literacy and Design
description: This course is a design-oriented lecture/seminar course for students who are concerned about the role they play as design professionals in affecting the biophysical world. The course's prime objective is to develop a new worldview founded on a broader sensitivity for things living and an accompanying set of meaningful environmental ethics. The course's secondary objectives are to develop a deeper knowledge of environmental issues, construct conceptual frameworks for analysis of these issues and to demonstrate how ecological knowledge can be applied to design. 
outcome: Develop grounding in the field of ecology as it pertains to the human/nature relationship and the manifest expressions of these ideas through the design of the built environment., Demonstrate a greater proficiency in critical thinking through rhetorical analysis and criticism of the readings., Display commitment to ethical principles, especially those pertaining to the environment., 

class: ARCH 4605
class title: Special Topics in Construction
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Construction. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2615 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 4697
class title: Special Investigations in Construction
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2614 and ARCH 2615.

class: ARCH 4698
class title: Special Investigations in Environmental Systems and Conservation
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1611 and ARCH 2616.

class: ARCH 4699
class title: Special Investigations in Structures
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1612 and ARCH 2613.

class: ARCH 5101
class title: Design IX
description: Advanced programs in architectural design, with options in, but not limited to, urban design, architectural technology, computational design, ecology, culture, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4102.

class: ARCH 5104
class title: Design Xa
description: A structured studio for those needing to take an alternative to design thesis. This course operates within one of advanced option design studios.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: nonadvancing grade in ARCH 5902.

class: ARCH 5111
class title: Core Design Studio I: Fundamentals
description: Introduction to fundamental concepts of architectural design and representation, including preliminary notions of site, program, and context. Emphasis on interpretive, analytical, and generative uses of drawing, physical modeling, and digital media in the design process. Focus on issues of context, program and architectonics in the design of a building; introduction to site planning.

class: ARCH 5113
class title: Core Design Studio III: Engaged Practices
description: These studios use an expanded form of design practice to address meta-issues in contemporary society. They recognize that architectural production is becoming increasingly heterogeneous and networked, and that real-world projects are seldom defined by site boundaries, or the work of a single profession. Design research and speculation are used to situate projects within larger social, political and environmental systems, creatively and inclusively engage the perspectives of other actors shaping the built environment, and opportunistically orchestrate real world processes and interactions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5112.

class: ARCH 5115
class title: Vertical Design Option Studio
description: The New York City vertical studios engage contemporary issues through examining urban and infrastructural issues in relation to ecological, technical, and cultural practices.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5114.

class: ARCH 5116
class title: Vertical Design Option Studio II
description: The vertical studios are topical in nature and engage contemporary issues in architectural practice and research.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5115. 

class: ARCH 5201
class title: Professional Practice
description: Examination of organizational and management theories and practices for delivering professional design services. Includes a historic overview of the profession and a review of the architect's responsibilities from the pre-contract phase through cost estimating and specifications to construction. Application of computer technology in preparing specifications.

class: ARCH 5203
class title: Multicultural Work Environments
description: Independent study. Promotes an understanding of the cultural assumptions we bring to the work environment and the effects of cultural differences on the ways in which architecture is practiced. A 5-10 page paper relates the experience of the internship to one or more texts approved by the instructor. Course may be taken more than once, but a maximum of 1 credit may be used to fulfill departmental free elective distribution requirement.

class: ARCH 5301
class title: Theories and Analyses of Architecture I
description: Introduces students to influential critical and creative themes in modern architecture. Topics cover influential 20th-century discourses and practices prior to the 1990s, the questions and contexts that they engage, and their implications for contemporary thinking and design. Discussions and assignments aim at developing critical and graphical readings of both works and writings as integral to the design process.

class: ARCH 5402
class title: Architecture, Culture, and Society
description: Social and cultural values are both reflected in buildings, landscapes, and cities, and constructed by them. At the same time, this articulation of people and built environments is framed by general socio-economic and political systems of ordering that often transcend locale. This course explores how these complexities might impact design practice, drawing on concepts and methods from disciplines such as anthropology, geography and cultural studies, as well as architectural history and theory, and referring to examples from around the world. 

class: ARCH 5511
class title: Constructed Drawing I
description: Focuses on bridging hand-drawing and sketching with digital representation as vehicles for design thinking and perception. Observational, analytical, and transformational exercises develop creative proficiency in freehand drawing and orthographic projection as well as computational thinking. Develops understanding of, and proficiency in, projective drawing, in both analog and digital forms. Students are introuced to a variety of digital representation applications, including modeling, rendering, animation, and scripting.

class: ARCH 5611
class title: Environmental Systems I: Introduction to Sustainable Design
description: This course examines the relationships between building, site, landscape and sustainability through the lens of ecology and systems thinking. Topics include: basic concepts of sustainability, energetic processes, climate, spatial data visualization, global warming, solar geometry, landscape processes, microclimates, site strategies and grading, building footprint &amp; sustainable building metrics.

class: ARCH 5613
class title: Structural Systems
description: Behavior and design of overall structural systems for buildings. Particular focus on systems used for resisting lateral loads (rigid frames, braced frames and shear walls) and for spanning long distances (trusses and space frames; cables and membranes; and arches, domes, and shells).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5612.

class: ARCH 5614
class title: Building Technology I: Materials and Methods
description: Building construction is examined from the following standpoints: life safety (including fire safety and zoning constraints on site planning); building service systems (plumbing, electrical, vertical transportation, security, fire protection); materials, sustainability, and life-cycle analysis; accessibility; technical documentation and outline specifications.

class: ARCH 5802
class title: History of Architecture II
description: The history of the built environment as social and cultural expression from the modern period to the present day is studied through selected examples from across the world. Architecture and urban design themes, theories, and ideas are explored through texts, artifacts, buildings, cities, and landscapes.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5801 or approved equivalent.

class: ARCH 5819
class title: Special Topics in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of History of Architecture and Urbanism. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5801 and ARCH 5802 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 5902
class title: Design X Thesis
description: An independent design project on a topic selected and developed by the student. Marking the transition between academic and professional practices, the thesis project is an opportunity for each student to define an individual position with regard to the discipline of architecture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: for students having matriculated prior to Summer 2023: ARCH 5101 and ARCH 5911 or Required Directed Elective (RDE); for students matriculating Summer 2023 and beyond: ARCH 5101 and ARCH 5911.

class: ARCH 5903
class title: Design IX Expanded Design Thesis
description: The expanded design thesis is designed for undergraduate students who wish to pursue a yearlong investigation. The expanded thesis must include substantial research and the completed work should be of wider scope and greater depth than is normal for a one-semester thesis. The thesis topic should extend the student's work already begun in a course or a sequence of courses taken before the fifth year.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4102 and approval of expanded thesis application. Students who carry a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.7 and minimum studio GPA of 3.8 are eligible to apply.

class: ARCH 5911
class title: Prethesis Methods Workshop
description: This course offers a synthesis of design and research methods for the development of an independent thesis proposal. Course work includes exposure to different theories and practices of design inquiry, explorations of critical positions for individual development, and preparation of a document encapsulating research leading to a thesis proposition. For students matriculating in Summer 2023 and beyond, successful completion of the course, which includes approval of the thesis document, is a prerequisite for advancement into ARCH 5902 - Design X Thesis.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4102 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 6109
class title: Special Problems in Design
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 6131
class title: Critical Introduction to Urban Data
description: The first course in the methods sequence introduces concepts and applications for urban data: where it comes from, its sources and applications. It stresses a critical-making approach in which projects build essential skills while also fostering critical discussion about the possibilities and limits of the tools, the uses and misuses of data, and alternate modes of data gathering, including field work, qualitative sources, and analog methods.

class: ARCH 6307
class title: Special Investigations in the Theory of Architecture II
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 6308
class title: Special Topics in the Theory of Architecture II
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Theory of Architecture. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5301 and ARCH 5302.

class: ARCH 6331
class title: Theories and Analysis I: Introduction
description: The seminar explores and develops some of the program's central concepts including ecology, infrastructure, urbanism, urban system, histories and theories of planetary change. Emphasis is on developing a critical awareness these topics: narratives; global perspectives; questions of ecology and urbanism as they intersect with power, colonialism, extraction, intersectional environmentalism, and modes of thought related to urban technology.

class: ARCH 6408
class title: Special Topics in Architecture, Culture, and Society
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Architecture, Culture and Society. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. For precise content, please see the Architecture Department webpage.

class: ARCH 6409
class title: Graduate Investigations in Architecture, Culture, and Society
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 6509
class title: Special Topics in Visual Representation II
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Visual Representation. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5511 and ARCH 5512 or permission of instructor.

class: ARCH 6605
class title: Special Topics in Construction
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of Construction. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. For precise content, please see the Architecture Department webpage.

class: ARCH 6609
class title: Special Investigations in Structures
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 6800
class title: State of the Discipline
description: This seminar will provide a survey of architectural historiography paying particular attention to the paradigm shifts of recent decades. Through the critical readings of important texts we will discuss the current state of the field while simultaneously reconsidering our position in it. The course will address how we apply theory to practice, develop research strategies that maximize methodological alliances, imbue the study of the past with contemporary relevance, and contribute as much to other disciplines as we borrow from them.

class: ARCH 6819
class title: Seminar in Special Topics in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of History of Architecture and Urbanism. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.

class: ARCH 7101
class title: Problems in Architecture Design
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 7112
class title: Design B: Topic Studio
description: Advanced programs in architectural design, with options in, but not limited to, urban design, architectural technology, computational design, ecology, culture, and representation.

class: ARCH 7113
class title: Design C: Topic Studio
description: Advanced programs in architectural design, with options in, but not limited to, urban design, architectural technology, computational design, ecology, culture, and representation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7112.

class: ARCH 7131
class title: Studio I: Foundation
description: The introductory practicum is a workshop-based studio that introduces students to skills, techniques, methods, for coming to know the city. Design here is a means to develop/explore/become familiar with the tools, skills, approaches and capacities that will form the basis for subsequent studio work. Urban systems are introduced through design modules and attendant skills: Mapping Urban Knowledges (creative engagement with urban systems); Engaging Urban Knowledges (introduction to engaging communities); Projecting Urban Knowledges (future planning/scenario building).

class: ARCH 7809
class title: Graduate Independent Study in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: Independent study.

class: ARCH 8151
class title: Design Topic Research Studio III: Matter Design Computation
description: Pre-thesis research on an independent design project on a topic selected and developed by the student in preparation for ARCH 8905.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7151, ARCH 7152.

class: ARCH 8903
class title: Projects in Advanced Architectural Design
description: Final project documentation drawing on work from ARCH 7111, ARCH 7112, and ARCH 7113 design studios as well as from the four courses representing the student's territory of investigation (TI) — discourse, ecology, representation, or urbanism — that demonstrate expertise in the student's TI.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7111 and ARCH 7112. Corequisite: ARCH 7113.

class: ARCH 8905
class title: Independent Design Thesis: Matter Design Computation
description: An independent design project on a topic selected and developed by the student and researched in ARCH 8151. Marking the transition between academic and professional practices, the objective of the thesis project is for each student to define an individual position with regard to the discipline and practice of architecture in the context of matter design computation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7151, ARCH 7152, ARCH 8151.

class: ARCH 8906
class title: Thesis in Advanced Architectural Design I
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7111 and ARCH 7112.

class: ARCH 8907
class title: Thesis in Advanced Architectural Design II
description: Independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 7111, ARCH 7112, and ARCH 8906.

class: ARCH 8911
class title: Proseminar in Design Research
description: This course offers a synthesis of design and research methods for the development of an independent thesis proposal. Course work includes exposure to different theories and practices of design inquiry, explorations of critical positions for individual development, and preparation of a document encapsulating research leading to a thesis proposition. Successful completion of the course, which includes approval of the thesis document, is a prerequisite for advancement into ARCH 8912 - Independent Design Thesis.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5301 and ARCH 5302.

class: ARCH 8912
class title: Independent Design Thesis
description: An independent design project on a topic selected and developed by the student and researched in ARCH 8911. Marking the transition between academic and professional practices, the thesis project is an opportunity for each student to define an individual position with regard to the discipline of architecture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5115, ARCH 8911, and all required core M.Arch courses.

class: ARCH 8920
class title: M.A. Essay Research
description: Independent research for the M.A. essay.

class: ARCH 8921
class title: M.A. Essay in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: Independent preparation of the M.A. essay,

class: ARCH 9901
class title: Ph.D. Dissertation in the History of Architecture and Urbanism
description: Independent study for the doctoral degree.

class: ARKEO 1200
class title: Ancient Peoples and Places
description: A broad introduction to archaeology-the study of material remains to answer questions about the human past. Case studies highlight the variability of ancient societies and illustrate the varied methods and interpretive frameworks archaeologists use to reconstruct them. This course can serve as a platform for both archaeology and anthropology undergraduate majors.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ARKEO 1702
class title: Great Discoveries in Greek and Roman Archaeology
description: This introductory course surveys the archaeology of the ancient Greek and Roman world. Each week, we will explore a different archaeological discovery that transformed scholars' understanding of the ancient world. From early excavations at sites such as Pompeii and Troy, to modern field projects across the Mediterranean, we will discover the rich cultures of ancient Greece and Rome while also exploring the history, methods, and major intellectual goals of archaeology.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ARKEO 2235
class title: Archaeology of Indigenous North America
description: This introductory course surveys archaeology's contributions to the study of American Indian cultural diversity and change in North America north of Mexico. Lectures and readings will examine topics ranging from the debate over when the continent was first inhabited to present-day conflicts between Native Americans and archaeologists over excavation and the interpretation of the past. We will review important archaeological sites such as Chaco Canyon, Cahokia, Lamoka Lake, and the Little Bighorn battlefield. A principal focus will be on major transformations in lifeways such as the adoption of agriculture, the development of political-economic hierarchies, and the disruptions that accompanied the arrival of Europeans to the continent.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ARKEO 2522
class title: Drinking through the Ages: Intoxicating Beverages in Near Eastern and World History
description: This course examines the production and exchange of wine, beer, coffee and tea, and the social and ideological dynamics involved in their consumption. We start in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, and end with tea and coffee in the Arab and Ottoman worlds. Archaeological and textual evidence will be used throughout to show the centrality of drinking in daily, ritual and political life.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ARKEO 3000
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study in Archaeology and Related Fields
description: Undergraduate students pursue topics of particular interest under the guidance of a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARKEO 1200 or permission of instructor.

class: ARKEO 3010
class title: The Archaeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARKEO 3090
class title: Introduction to Dendrochronology
description: Introduction and training in dendrochronology (tree-ring dating) and its applications in archaeology, art history, climate and environment through lab work and participation in ongoing research projects using ancient to modern wood samples from around the world. Supervised reading and laboratory/project work. Possibilities exists for summer fieldwork in the Mediterranean, Mexico, and New York State.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ARKEO 3200
class title: Heritage Forensics
description: This course provides students with an orientation to the new technologies reshaping the effort to preserve cultural heritage. The course introduces students to the tools that Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing (especially aerial and satellite imaging) provide for advancing heritage preservation and detecting cultural erasure. Our focus will be on contexts where heritage has emerged as a site of conflict, from Bosnia to Syria to Ukraine. Students will develop proficiency in a range of spatial technologies and their application to the human past. The course will culminate in projects that use new technologies to save heritage at risk. 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ARKEO 3230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: ARKEO 3520
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ARKEO 4200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: ARKEO 4233
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARKEO 4246
class title: Human Osteology
description: This is an intensive laboratory course in the study of human skeletal remains. A detailed knowledge of skeletal anatomy is fundamental to forensic anthropology, bioarchaeology, and the medical sciences. This course teaches students how to identify all 206 bones and 32 teeth of the human skeleton, in both complete and fragmentary states. Students will also learn osteological methods for establishing a biological profile and documenting skeletal trauma and pathological lesions. Hands-on laboratory training will be supplemented by case studies that demonstrate the importance of human osteology for criminal investigations in the present and the study of health and violence in the past. The ethics of working with human remains are also discussed.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ARKEO 4256
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: An introduction to belief systems in ancient Mexico and Central America, emphasizing the blending of religion, astrology, myth, history, and prophecy. Interpreting text and image in pre-Columbian books and inscriptions is a major focus.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARKEO 4272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ARKEO 4981
class title: Honors Thesis Research
description: Independent work under the close guidance of a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: admission to honors program.

class: ARKEO 4982
class title: Honors Thesis Write-Up
description: The student, under faculty direction, will prepare a senior thesis.

class: ARKEO 6000
class title: Graduate Independent Study in Archaeology
description: Graduate students pursue advanced topics of particular interest under the guidance of faculty member(s).

class: ARKEO 6110
class title: The Archeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.

class: ARKEO 6230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.

class: ARKEO 6233
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.

class: ARKEO 6530
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ARKEO 6620
class title: Perspectives on Preservation
description: Introduction to the theory, history, and practice of Historic Preservation Planning in America, with an emphasis on understanding the development and implementation of a preservation project. The course discusses projects ranging in scale and character from individual buildings to districts to cultural landscapes; as well as topics such as preservation economics, government regulations, significance and authenticity, and the politics of identifying and conserving cultural and natural resources.

class: ARKEO 6701
class title: Advanced Readings in Archaeology
description: Introduction to core readings in Greek and Roman art and archaeology. 

class: ARKEO 6755
class title: Archaeological Dendrochronology
description: An introduction to the field of Dendrochronology and associated topics with an emphasis on their applications in the field of archaeology and related heritage-buildings fields. Course aimed at graduate level with a focus on critique of scholarship in the field and work on a project as part of the course.

class: ARKEO 7000
class title: CIAMS Core Seminar in Archaeological Theory and Method
description: Archaeology studies the past through its material remains. In doing so, it builds on wide-ranging theories and methods to develop its own disciplinary toolbox. This graduate seminar explores this toolbox, treating a topic of broad theoretical and/or methodological interest such as emerging topics in archaeological thought, the history of archaeological theory, key archaeological methods, themes that tie archaeology to the wider domain of the humanities and social sciences, or some combination of the above. The seminar is taught by various members of the Archaeology faculty, each of whom offers their own version of the seminar. The seminar is required for incoming CIAMS M.A. students, and needed for CIAMS membership for Ph.D. students.

class: ARKEO 7200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: ARKEO 7246
class title: Human Osteology
description: This is an intensive laboratory course in the study of human skeletal remains. A detailed knowledge of skeletal anatomy is fundamental to forensic anthropology, bioarchaeology, and the medical sciences. This course teaches students how to identify all 206 bones and 32 teeth of the human skeleton, in both complete and fragmentary states. Students will also learn osteological methods for establishing a biological profile and documenting skeletal trauma and pathological lesions. Hands-on laboratory training will be supplemented by case studies that demonstrate the importance of human osteology for criminal investigations in the present and the study of health and violence in the past. The ethics of working with human remains are also discussed.

class: ARKEO 7250
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: Explores the ways Mesoamericans understood the world and their place in it, and the ways they constructed history as these are reflected in the few books that have survived from the period before the European invasion. Examines the structure of writing and systems of notation, especially calendars, and considers their potential for illuminating Mesoamerican world views and approaches to history. Primary focus is detailed analysis of five precolumbian books: Codex Borgia, a central Mexican manual of divinatory ritual; Codex Boturini, a history of migration in central Mexico; Codex Nuttall, a Mixtec dynastic history; and two Maya books of astrology and divination, Codex Dresden and Codex Madrid.

class: ARKEO 7272
class title: Archaeology of Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement
description: This seminar uses archaeology to examine engagements between settlers and indigenous peoples throughout world history. Archaeology provides a perspective on settler-indigenous encounters that both supplements and challenges conventional models.  We will assess the strengths and weaknesses of various theories of cultural engagement, examine methodologies, and explore a series of archaeological case studies, using examples from both the ancient world and the European expansion over the past 600 years. The seminar provides a comparative perspective on indigenous-colonial relationships, in particular exploring the hard-fought spaces of relative autonomy created and sustained by indigenous peoples. 

class: ARKEO 8901
class title: Master's Thesis
description: Students, working individually with faculty member(s), prepare a master's thesis in archaeology.

class: ART 1504
class title: Introduction to Drawing in Rome
description: This course introduces students to principles and techniques of representation. Emphasis is on creating the illusion of space and form through line, the rendering of light and shade, and studies in perspective. Students have the opportunity to explore various media such as charcoal, chalk, pencil, pen, ink, and wash. Assumes no prior knowledge of drawing.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 1602
class title: Introduction to Photography in Rome
description: Drawing on Rome's historic and contemporary resources for inspiration, this course introduces photography as a means to visual interpretation and authorship. It addresses concepts essential to lens based artistic practice, as well as the technical foundations of digital photography. In this course students learn about diverse approaches to image making with the camera, and develop a body of work referencing their Rome experience. The course includes lectures, critiques, studio assignments, and visits to museums, galleries, and photography studios.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 1909
class title: Internship Practicum
description: Students secure a professional internship with an art organization where they engage in challenging professional activity designed to assist them in experience across the breadth of art practice. The organization may be any art-related business, institution, or studio. Students are required to maintain a regular journal reflecting their engagement with the practice, submit a 5-10 page paper to the instructor summarizing the relevance of the internship experience to their professional goals and obtain an official letter from the internship sponsor confirming successful performance of internship responsibilities.

class: ART 2201
class title: Painting: Language of Painting
description: This course is an introduction to understanding how the embodied process of painting can create meaning and resonance and provide possibilities of expression where words are not sufficient. Through focus on color theory and pictorial composition, students will explore ways to build their own visual vocabulary while gaining technical facility and knowledge of materials and processes.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 2301
class title: Print Media: The Cultures of Print
description: This is an inclusive course that offers an expanded study of traditional printmaking processes through experimental print media. Print media is a critical practice grounded in the history of all printed matter and the printed form as a social medium. Students will participate in a comprehensive range of technical and aesthetic approaches centered in a range of strategies including the art work as multiple, digital and cultural production. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 2401
class title: Introduction to Sculpture
description: This course introduces students to artistic practice in three dimensions using a variety of materials and approaches. Problems require the student to address materials in terms of cultural and historical context. Assumes no prior knowledge of sculpture.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 2501
class title: Drawing: Contemporary Art Practice Through Drawing
description: This course provides students entering the B.F.A. program a gateway to contemporary art practice through drawing.  Drawing here is conceived both as a self-sufficient medium and as a tool useful for the conceptual and practical development of ideas in other media.  A wide range of technically and conceptually conceived assignments will introduce students to the breadth of contemporary practice and drawing itself.

class: ART 2601
class title: Photography: Introduction to Photography
description: This course explores camera and lens as devices that frame and translate three-dimensional space to a two-dimensional surface. Through assignments and individual investigation, students acquire a deeper understanding of visual perception and photography as medium for personal expression. This course introduces students to photographic processes and assumes no prior knowledge of photography.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 2701
class title: Media Arts, Performance, and Sound: Intersections
description: This interdisciplinary course offers an introduction to the methods employed in media arts, sound and performance. It provides a comprehensive exploration of the strategies and historical context of these disciplines. Students will engage in an interdisciplinary studio setting with a specific focus on one of these areas. Through hands-on experience, they will delve into contemporary artistic practices, honing their technical skills to develop and realize their creative projects. Potential topics covered include video and animation, digital image production, sound art, performance art, and movement
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 2900
class title: Shop and Tech
description: This course gives undergraduate B.F.A. students introductory experience in the usage and safe practices of Cornell AAP's machine fabrication and digital media facilities. At the end of this semester B.F.A. students will be able to apply basic shop and technology knowledge and skills into their classwork and individual creative work.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: ART 2103 and ART 2501.

class: ART 2907
class title: Visual Imaging in the Electronic Age
description: Interdisciplinary survey course designed to introduce students in the creative arts, science, and engineering to the concepts of 2D and 3D digital pictorial representation and display. It is a concept course that concentrates on "why" rather than "how." Topics include perspective representations, display technology, how television works, bandwidth concepts, digital photography, computer graphics modeling and rendering, color perception, 3D data acquisition, volumetric imaging, and historical precedents, primarily from the art world.
distribution categories: (MQR-AAP)

class: ART 3001
class title: Rome Studio
description: This class will concentrate on the development, through research and material experimentation, of a studio practice informed by historical and social context. Different research and production methodologies will be encouraged to develop a practice that is critical, self-sustaining, and flexible. Specific attention will be paid to implications of transferring artistic practice to Rome, i.e., the way the specificities and generalities of a new geographical setting inform one's work. Required course for B.F.A. students participating in Rome.

class: ART 3091
class title: Directed Readings in Art
description: Independent reading allows a student the opportunity to investigate special interests that are not treated in regularly scheduled courses. The student develops a plan of study to pursue under the supervision of a faculty member.

class: ART 3092
class title: Independent Studio in Art
description: Independent studio allows a student the opportunity to investigate special interests that are not treated in regularly scheduled courses. The student develops a plan of study to pursue under the supervision of a faculty member.

class: ART 3093
class title: Directed Research in Art
description: Independent research allows a student the opportunity to investigate special interests that are not treated in regularly scheduled courses. The student develops a plan of study to pursue under the supervision of a faculty member.

class: ART 3102
class title: Contemporary Rome Seminar
description: Introduces students to contemporary art in Rome through studio visits, gallery exhibitions, and museum collections. Lectures by artists, critics, and others. Traces art from idea to realization and explores the gallery and its relationship to artists and to promotion of art, the role of the art critic and museum, and art collecting.

class: ART 3299
class title: Painting: Special Topics
description: Topics TBA.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2201 or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3301
class title: Print Media: Belonging and Representation: Relinking to Site and Unfolding the Dynamics of Display
description: In this course, students visit campus facilities and regional sites to learn and gather information about their cultural location. These visits will be contextualized by issues of public and private space, land use, and history of place. Students plan projects in response to site visits and use the print studio as an intermediary space for production based on this research. The course concludes with an exhibition installation in the college galleries or specific sites.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2301 or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3307
class title: Print Media: To Publish is to Make Publics
description: This class will explore the potential of printed media to bridge the gap between public and private modes of address. This course will integrate theory, history and practice. On the production side, we will learn how to use a Risograph printer to make high volume editions and book binding techniques. On the historical side, we will study histories of printmaking as they relate to social and political movements. On the theoretical side, the course will be contextualized through readings that will expand our understanding of what we mean by public, private and circulation. This course welcomes all and any student regardless of their previous print or image making experience. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2301 or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3404
class title: Sculpture: Installation
description: Site-specific installations will be mediated through a variety of materials and individual and collaborative research. This course expands an awareness of traditional (welding, metal casting) and non-traditional materials (papermaking, rubber, fabric) though figurative modeling, abstract carving, and three-dimensional form and design.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2401, or architecture design studio, or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3501
class title: Drawing: Pictorial Languages
description: This course explores the capacity of drawing to visualize complex representations, experience and informational systems using a wide range of materials and formats. Students pursue both experimental and more developed individual, serial, and collaborative drawing projects that challenge and question the conventional boundaries of drawing.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2501, ART 1501, or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3699
class title: Photography: Special Topics
description: Advanced studio course related to photography. Topics vary each semester.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 2601 or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3705
class title: Media Arts, Performance, and Sound: Sound
description: This advanced class will continue the investigation of ways of using sound in the creation of an artwork. Methods of using sound in disciplines outside of art will shape our considerations. Historical approaches to sound art to contemporary experiments using sound will be examined in this studio course.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2502, ART 2701, or permission of instructor.

class: ART 3803
class title: Art History: Italian Cinema
description: This course examines the cinematic representation of Italy with particular emphasis to the use of settings and space. We will explore how the visions of urban and rural spaces reflect the evolving cultural, social and political fabric of a nation in a period of rapid and often traumatic historical change. The course will feature screening of films set in several Italian locations, from Rome to Milan, from Naples to Venice, from Sicily to the Apennines, and represent different moments of Italian contemporary history. We will take advantage of the unique opportunity to study this cinema while residing in Rome and traveling in Italy, through the experience of the real settings that have figured so prominently in Italian cinema. Each session consists of an in-class lecture and a film screening. The course will also include one or two guest lecturers each semester.
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP, LA-AAP)

class: ART 3804
class title: Black Sound and Visual Culture
description: In this interdisciplinary seminar, we will study the strategies that sound artists, composers, visual artists, writers, and filmmakers have employed to use Black sounds as a sign. We will explore intersections between sound and image throughout the African diaspora. Intersections in question include the place of sound art within different Black musical and visual traditions, Black music as a resource for painting and sculpture, the visual design of Black music projects, the Black soundscape and the built environment, acoustic ecology and mapping in Black communities, and African diasporic filmmaking as a sonic art form.
outcome: Students will be able to articulate the arguments artists and cultural critics have made for and against the terms "Black sound" and "Black music"., Students will gain familiarity through exhibitions, screenings, and readings with the role Black sound and music have played in the visual arts and culture., Students will be able to identify some important concepts and techniques related to creative works made at the intersection of sound and image production throughout the African Diaspora., Students will have direct engagement with visual and sound artists whose work engages the material or idea of Black sound/music., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AAP) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ART 3874
class title: Indigenous Spaces and Materiality
description: The materiality of art as willful agents will be considered from ontology to an Indigenous expression of "more than human relations." Located at the intersection of multiple modernities, art and science; the shift from art historical framings of form over matter and connoisseurship to viewing materiality as an active process that continues to map larger social processes and transformation will be discussed. Archives will be sites of investigation across varied Indigenous geographies marking place, space, bodies and land. This class is designed to introduce the latest methodologies in the field of art history, material culture and Indigenous Studies. Students will consult the archive, do hands-on evaluation of art, material culture, and expand their historic and theoretical knowledge about materiality. Beyond the theoretically and historically grounded critique this class provides, it will also introduce students to working with original documents and / or conduct on-site research. Students will consult the Cornell University library holdings of the Huntington Free Library's Native American Collection and conduct original archival research with historic and contemporary art and material culture at Haudenosaunee cultural centers, museums and exhibitions spaces through a class trip or individual visits (TBD).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ART 4003
class title: Thesis I
description: This course continues the independent studio research and production of the Advanced Practice course to prepare students for ART 4004 - Thesis II. During Thesis I, students begin to research, develop, and clarify their thesis proposals through dialogues, readings, and critiques with members of the Core Thesis Faculty. Emphasis is on deepening awareness of the intention and reading of the work and situating individual interests within and against historical, theoretical, and conceptual contexts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ART 3006.

class: ART 4004
class title: Thesis II
description: This course is the final B.F.A. studio semester in which students develop and present an independent body of work that may take the form of an exhibition or some other project. Students will work with members of the Core Thesis Faculty to define and refine the positions formulated within each work and to foster the ability to speak about one's own work as well as the work of others. Emphasis is placed on developing strategies of productive self-criticality to inform their work both during and beyond the thesis semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: all advanced 3000-level studios, ART 3006, and ART 4003.

class: ART 4100
class title: Senior Seminar
description: This advanced seminar is designed to accompany the first semester of Thesis studio. The class fosters investigation of artistic intentionality and its relation to visual expression and its discursive treatment. It begins with assignments structured to identify the conceptual, social, historical, and formal considerations relevant to each student's artistic practice. Once identified, these become the basis for rigorous research and consideration. This undertaking is designed to support advanced thesis projects and art practices going forward.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: all required 3000-level ART studios. Corequisite: ART 4003.

class: ART 5092
class title: Graduate Independent Studio in Art
description: Independent studio allows a student the opportunity to investigate special interests that are sometimes not treated in regularly scheduled courses. The student develops a plan of study to pursue under the supervision of an Art faculty member.

class: ART 5299
class title: Painting: Special Topics
description: Topics TBA.

class: ART 5301
class title: Print Media: Belonging and Representation: Relinking to Site and Unfolding the Dynamics of Display
description: In this course, students visit campus facilities and regional sites to learn and gather information about their cultural location. These visits will be contextualized by issues of public and private space, land use, and history of place. Students plan projects in response to site visits and use the print studio as an intermediary space for production based on this research. The course concludes with an exhibition installation in the college galleries or specific sites.

class: ART 5307
class title: Print Media: To Publish is to Make Publics
description: This class will explore the potential of printed media to bridge the gap between public and private modes of address. This course will integrate theory, history and practice. On the production side, we will learn how to use a Risograph printer to make high volume editions and book binding techniques. On the historical side, we will study histories of printmaking as they relate to social and political movements. On the theoretical side, the course will be contextualized through readings that will expand our understanding of what we mean by public, private and circulation. This course welcomes all and any student regardless of their previous print or image making experience.

class: ART 5404
class title: Sculpture: Installation
description: Site-specific installations will be mediated through a variety of materials and individual and collaborative research. This course expands an awareness of traditional (welding, metal casting) and non-traditional materials (papermaking, rubber, fabric) though figurative modeling, abstract carving, and three-dimensional form and design.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: architecture design studio or permission of instructor.

class: ART 5501
class title: Drawing: Pictorial Languages
description: This course explores the capacity of drawing to visualize complex representations, experience and informational systems using a wide range of materials and formats. Students pursue both experimental and more developed individual, serial, and collaborative drawing projects that challenge and question the conventional boundaries of drawing.

class: ART 5699
class title: Photography: Special Topics
description: Advanced studio course related to photography. Topics vary each semester.

class: ART 5705
class title: Media Arts, Performance, and Sound: Sound
description: This advanced class will continue the investigation of ways of using sound in the creation of an artwork. Methods of using sound in disciplines outside of art will shape our considerations. Historical approaches to sound art to contemporary experiments using sound will be examined in this studio course.

class: ART 5804
class title: Black Sound and Visual Culture
description: In this interdisciplinary seminar, we will study the strategies that sound artists, composers, visual artists, writers, and filmmakers have employed to use Black sounds as a sign. We will explore intersections between sound and image throughout the African diaspora. Intersections in question include the place of sound art within different Black musical and visual traditions, Black music as a resource for painting and sculpture, the visual design of Black music projects, the Black soundscape and the built environment, acoustic ecology and mapping in Black communities, and African diasporic filmmaking as a sonic art form.  
outcome: Students will be able to articulate the arguments artists and cultural critics have made for and against the terms "Black sound" and "Black music"., Students will gain familiarity through exhibitions, screenings, and readings with the role Black sound and music have played in the visual arts and culture., Students will be able to identify some important concepts and techniques related to creative works made at the intersection of sound and image production throughout the African Diaspora., Students will have direct engagement with visual and sound artists whose work engages the material or idea of Black sound/music., 

class: ART 6000
class title: Graduate Seminar: Contemporary Theory and Art
description: Seminar exploring selected writings on current issues in the visual arts. Designed to introduce graduate students to several approaches to critical inquiry and analysis of contemporary artistic practice. Topics vary but may include related issues in areas such as critical theory, identity politics, institutional frames, sustainability, urbanization, and globalization.

class: ART 6092
class title: Independent Mentored Study in Image Text
description: Semester-long independent creative work in consultation with faculty mentor.  Critique and discussion of ongoing creative work is completed during the fall and spring semesters using video conferencing and electronic document exchange. Course plan will be crafted collaboratively by student and faculty mentor at the beginning of each semester to maximize both continued focus and new development in creative work. 
outcome: In this course, students will develop an intensive studio practice based on creative experimentation and revision., In this course, students will develop a research practice to support the growth of your creative work., In this course, students will prepare for the further development of your studio practice through reflection, goal-setting and planning for future work., 

class: ART 8001
class title: Graduate Studio III
description: Course instructor is the chair of student's Thesis Committee. Students are responsible, under faculty direction, for planning their own projects and selecting the media in which they work. All members of the faculty are available for individual consultation.

class: ARTH 1100
class title: Art Histories: An Introduction
description: This team-taught course introduces students to the History of Art as a global and interdisciplinary field. Led by a selection of professors from the department, in collaboration with staff and faculty of the Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art, its primary aim is to familiarize students with the most significant geographical areas, epochs and works of art, as well as with methods employed in their study and analysis. The course will be organized around a changing selection of themes central to the history of art. The theme for fall 2024 is "Materiality." Considering how artists and artisans from antiquity to the present have mobilized a broad range of materials and processes to create works of art, we will explore the intimate relationship between makers, matter, and meaning.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 1178
class title: FWS: Looking and Writing the City: Rear Windows/Sideview Mirrors

class: ARTH 2400
class title: Introduction to Early Modern Art: Cosmopolitanism and Empire
description: This course offers an introduction to the diverse global encounters and exchanges that shaped early modern European art and material culture, c.1400-1650. The course will be structured around nine European imperial and/or cosmopolitan centres and their connections between one another, and with the Ottoman Empire, Asia, Africa, and the Americas. We will explore how global commerce influenced material and artistic consumption, and the ways in which early modern slavery was part and parcel of Europe's art world. Special focus discussions will deepen students' knowledge of artistic materials and media and the ways in which global connections impacted the making of early modern art. Students will gain a broad understanding of early modern art and practices of making, the historical contexts in which art objects were produced, and their social and cultural uses. Students will become familiar with the language and approaches of art history and material culture studies, as well as with key methodologies including globalized, decolonial, critical race, and gender theories.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 2500
class title: Introduction to the History of Photography
description: Provides a lecture survey of the history of photography over a course of two centuries. Starting with its invention in the 1830s, covers the subject topically and chronologically. During the nineteenth century, focus is on technical developments and on the complex relations that situate photography in relation to painting, portraiture, urban life, war, anthropology and ethnology, exploration and travel, and science and industry. Over the course of the twentieth century, photography is enriched by new developments: its use as a modernist and experimental art form, in social documentary and photojournalism, in propaganda, in advertising and fashion. In recent decades, photography has assumed a centrality in the practice of conceptual postmodern art, and is currently undergoing a major transformation in the age of digital media.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 2600
class title: Introduction to Modern Western Art: Materials, Media, and the End of Masterpieces
description: This course offers a broad introduction to some of the artistic practices that have come to be known as "modern" in Europe and the United States. Beginning with the upheavals of the French Revolution and carrying through to the turmoil of two world wars, we will survey the role of both fine art and visual culture in a period of great political, social, and technological change. The very definition of art was revolutionized in this moment, as an emphasis on materials and experiments with new media like photography and cinema took precedence over the production of highly-skilled masterpieces. Particular attention will be given to exchanges between western representation and that of other cultures. Topics covered include revolutionary propaganda; romantic unreason; caricature and political critique; the changing pace of the modern city; architecture in the machine age; the place of women in modernity; and the impact of new technology on spectatorship. Students should leave the course with increased familiarity with key art movements in the modern era and the skills to analyze and appreciate art and visual culture from any period. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 2750
class title: Introduction to Humanities
description: These seminars offer an introduction to the humanities by exploring historical, cultural, social, and political themes. Students will explore themes in critical dialogue with a range of texts and media drawn from the arts, humanities, and/or humanistic social sciences. Guest speakers, including Cornell faculty and Society for the Humanities Fellows, will present from different disciplines and points of view. Students will make field trips to relevant local sites and visit Cornell special collections and archives. Students enrolled in these seminars will have the opportunity to participate in additional programming related to the annual focus theme of Cornell's Society for the Humanities and the Humanities Scholars Program for undergraduate humanities research.

class: ARTH 3210
class title: The Archaeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 3250
class title: Introduction to Dendrochronology
description: Introduction and training in dendrochronology (tree-ring dating) and its applications in archaeology, art history, climate and environment through lab work and participation in ongoing research projects using ancient to modern wood samples from around the world. Supervised reading and laboratory/project work. Possibilities exists for summer fieldwork in the Mediterranean, Mexico, and New York State.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ARTH 3650
class title: History and Theory of Digital Art
description: In this course, we will examine the role of electronic and digital technologies in the arts of the late 20th and 21st centuries with emphasis on Europe and North America. Beginning with the cybernetically and systems-inspired work of the late sixties, we will explore early uses of computer technology, including early experiments in synthetic video in the 1970s. An overview of pre-internet telematic experiments will lead to an investigation of net art and later currents of digital art. The ongoing development of behavioral art forms will be a central theme. Critical evaluation of various attitudes concerning technology will be encouraged.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 3850
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4101
class title: Proseminar: Introduction to Methods
description: Works of art have always engendered political, social, and cultural meanings. This seminar presents an introduction to the methods used by art historians and the objects and ideas that constitute the historiography of their discipline. If art history was once understood as the study of the development of style in "European art", over the past century its practitioners have attempted to embrace a "global" perspective and to address issues of class, ethnicity, nationality, sexual orientation, and gender. Readings will focus on historically situating methods and the implications of their cross-cultural application. They will be discussed in the framework of institutions, apparatuses and practices that have shaped the field, identifying how these have contributed to systemic mechanisms of hegemony and exclusion. Papers will encourage students to put methods into practice, realizing in the process that subject matter is not an isolated choice to which methods are applied, but something that profoundly affects the approach that the researcher brings to the writing and conceptualizing and doing of art history. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4153
class title: Topics in Feminist Media Arts
description: Fall 2024 Topic: Feminist Posthumanisms in Visual Arts. While feminist art in new media address traditional feminist concerns such as the female body, identity, representation, feminist history, and consumerism, others directly engage with recent theoretical currents on the Anthropocene, posthumanism, and new materialisms that view humans and non-humans as co-dependent. Non-humans include environmental factors, animals, plants, bacteria, and machines. This seminar will examine work by contemporary artists from various geographical areas and cultural traditions engaged with posthumanist perspectives in relation to relevant theoretical texts and previous feminist media arts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4233
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4465
class title: Early Modern Materialities, 1400-1700
description: This seminar analyzes the contours of early modern Europe's material landscape and the ways in which global exchanges and technological advancements impacted material production and consumption. Working within an interdisciplinary framework, we will explore the dynamic material, global, and social dimensions of objects, and the meanings that different materials could generate in art production. Each week we will investigate an early modern art material – from ivory, to amber, shells, and pearls – and its use and/or representation in a range of artworks. Students will learn to "think materially;" they will be introduced to multiple techniques of production, harvesting, and fashioning of materials, and will consider the broader social, economic, political, and environmental factors that shaped material culture.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4545
class title: The Photobook
description: Satisfies Tutorial Requirement. The history of photography as an art has been mostly on the page, not on the wall. This course refocuses the standard museum and gallery history of photography back to the book. Significantly, it takes advantage, through field trips, of the proximity of Cornell to the George Eastman House in Rochester, whose library houses the most important photobooks from around the world, including the best creations from Russia, Japan, and the United States.  Students will learn the basics of photographic printing, book construction, the role of the photobook in the rise of the artist's book in the twentieth century, as well as advanced skills in analysis of the photographic picture and sequencing. Major themes will include the scientific photobook of the nineteenth century, the documentary photobook of the 1930s, the propaganda photobook of the communist era, the postwar photobooks of Japan, the personal/domestic turn of the 1970s, and the present state of the photobook in the digital era. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4621
class title: Art and Empire in Britian and France
description: This seminar explores the images and objects produced, collected, and displayed in the context of the British and French empires of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Drawing on a range of perspectives—including postcolonial studies, critical race studies, and indigenous studies—we will develop a critical vocabulary for addressing the history of colonialism and the ongoing process of decolonization, asking what particular problems and opportunities art history presents for the study of empire. In what ways were aesthetics entangled with imperial ideology? How did works of art support or challenge dominant political, social, and cultural narratives? And what does a study of historic empires have to offer to our understanding of globalization today? We will also engage with the ways in which the legacy of empire is treated in contemporary museology. Readings on France and Britain will be combined with theoretical texts that have informed scholarship on the history of imperialism more broadly. Participants in the seminar are encouraged to apply the themes covered to a geographical area and time period of their choice in their final paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4774
class title: Indigenous Spaces and Materiality
description: The materiality of art as willful agents will be considered from ontology to an Indigenous expression of "more than human relations." Located at the intersection of multiple modernities, art and science; the shift from art historical framings of form over matter and connoisseurship to viewing materiality as an active process that continues to map larger social processes and transformation will be discussed. Archives will be sites of investigation across varied Indigenous geographies marking place, space, bodies and land. This class is designed to introduce the latest methodologies in the field of art history, material culture and Indigenous Studies. Students will consult the archive, do hands-on evaluation of art, material culture, and expand their historic and theoretical knowledge about materiality. Beyond the theoretically and historically grounded critique this class provides, it will also introduce students to working with original documents and / or conduct on-site research. Students will consult the Cornell University library holdings of the Huntington Free Library's Native American Collection and conduct original archival research with historic and contemporary art and material culture at Haudenosaunee cultural centers, museums and exhibitions spaces through a class trip or individual visits (TBD).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4852
class title: Shadowplay: Asian Art and Performance
description: Shadowplay is a superb medium for storytelling. As with many performing arts in Asia, neither the highly stylized images of puppets, nor its musical, or linguistic complexity detract from its wide popularity. Why does an art that appears so obscure exercise such broad appeal? This seminar explores the playful and politically adept fluctuations of shadows across screens from India to Mainland and Island Southeast Asia. We will also briefly examine East Asian developments, particularly in China and Japan. In each of the countries where shadow theatre exists it has acquired its own repertory and a distinct technique and style of its own. This aesthetic has translated locally into paint, sculpture, architecture, cinema, and modern and contemporary installation art. Classes will meet regularly in the Herbert F. Johnson Museum.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ARTH 4991
class title: Independent Study
description: Individual investigation and discussion of special topics not covered in the regular course offerings, by arrangement with a member of the department.

class: ARTH 4998
class title: Honors Work I
description: A course for senior Art History majors working on honors theses, with selected reading, research projects, etc., under the supervision of a member of the History of Art faculty.

class: ARTH 5991
class title: Supervised Reading
description: Individual investigation and discussion of special topics not covered in the regular course offerings, by arrangement with a member of the department.

class: ARTH 5993
class title: Supervised Study
description: Individual investigation and discussion of special topics not covered in the regular course offerings, by arrangement with a member of the department.

class: ARTH 6000
class title: Graduate Research Methods in Art History
description: This graduate seminar introduces a range of research methods in art history and visual studies. We will read and discuss a series of texts related to the history and current practice of the discipline of art history. In addition, each week, a member of the faculty will visit the seminar to discuss their own research practice. This course is required of all first-year Ph.D. students in History of Art, and is open to graduate students from other fields.

class: ARTH 6101
class title: Proseminar: Introduction to Methods
description: Works of art have always engendered political, social, and cultural meanings. This seminar presents an introduction to the methods used by art historians and the objects and ideas that constitute the historiography of their discipline. If art history was once understood as the study of the development of style in "European art", over the past century its practitioners have attempted to embrace a "global" perspective and to address issues of class, ethnicity, nationality, sexual orientation, and gender. Readings will focus on historically situating methods and the implications of their cross-cultural application. They will be discussed in the framework of institutions, apparatuses and practices that have shaped the field, identifying how these have contributed to systemic mechanisms of hegemony and exclusion. Papers will encourage students to put methods into practice, realizing in the process that subject matter is not an isolated choice to which methods are applied, but something that profoundly affects the approach that the researcher brings to the writing and conceptualizing and doing of art history. 

class: ARTH 6153
class title: Topics in Feminist Media Arts
description: Fall 24 Topic: Feminist Posthumanisms in Visual Arts. While feminist art in new media address traditional feminist concerns such as the female body, identity, representation, feminist history, and consumerism, others directly engage with recent theoretical currents on the Anthropocene, posthumanism, and new materialisms that view humans and non-humans as co-dependent. Non-humans include environmental factors, animals, plants, bacteria, and machines. This seminar will examine work by contemporary artists from various geographical areas and cultural traditions engaged with posthumanist perspectives in relation to relevant theoretical texts and previous feminist media arts.

class: ARTH 6210
class title: The Archeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.

class: ARTH 6233
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.

class: ARTH 6465
class title: Early Modern Materialities, 1400-1700
description: This seminar analyzes the contours of early modern Europe's material landscape and the ways in which global exchanges and technological advancements impacted material production and consumption. Working within an interdisciplinary framework, we will explore the dynamic material, global, and social dimensions of objects, and the meanings that different materials could generate in art production. Each week we will investigate an early modern art material – from ivory, to amber, shells, and pearls – and its use and/or representation in a range of artworks. Students will learn to "think materially;" they will be introduced to multiple techniques of production, harvesting, and fashioning of materials, and will consider the broader social, economic, political, and environmental factors that shaped material culture.

class: ARTH 6545
class title: The Photobook
description: Topic 2024: Tutorial. The history of photography as an art has been mostly on the page, not on the wall. This course refocuses the standard museum and gallery history of photography back to the book.  Significantly, it takes advantage, through field trips, of the proximity of Cornell to the George Eastman House in Rochester, whose library houses the most important photobooks from around the world, including the best creations from Russia, Japan, and the United States. Students will learn the basics of photographic printing, book construction, the role of the photobook in the rise of the artist's book in the twentieth century, as well as advanced skills in analysis of the photographic picture and sequencing. Major themes will include the scientific photobook of the nineteenth century, the documentary photobook of the 1930s, the propaganda photobook of the communist era, the postwar photobooks of Japan, the personal/domestic turn of the 1970s, and the present state of the photobook in the digital era.

class: ARTH 6621
class title: Art and Empire in Britain and France
description: This seminar explores the images and objects produced, collected, and displayed in the context of the British and French empires of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Drawing on a range of perspectives—including postcolonial studies, critical race studies, and indigenous studies—we will develop a critical vocabulary for addressing the history of colonialism and the ongoing process of decolonization, asking what particular problems and opportunities art history presents for the study of empire. In what ways were aesthetics entangled with imperial ideology? How did works of art support or challenge dominant political, social, and cultural narratives? And what does a study of historic empires have to offer to our understanding of globalization today? We will also engage with the ways in which the legacy of empire is treated in contemporary museology. Readings on France and Britain will be combined with theoretical texts that have informed scholarship on the history of imperialism more broadly. Participants in the seminar are encouraged to apply the themes covered to a geographical area and time period of their choice in their final paper.

class: ARTH 6653
class title: History and Theory of Digital Art
description: In this course, we will examine the role of electronic and digital technologies in the arts of the late 20th and 21st centuries with emphasis on Europe and North America. Beginning with the cybernetically and systems-inspired work of the late sixties, we will explore early uses of computer technology, including early experiments in synthetic video in the 1970s. An overview of pre-internet telematic experiments will lead to an investigation of net art and later currents of digital art. The ongoing development of behavioral art forms will be a central theme. Critical evaluation of various attitudes concerning technology will be encouraged.

class: ARTH 6774
class title: Indigenous Spaces and Materiality
description: The materiality of art as willful agents will be considered from ontology to an Indigenous expression of "more than human relations." Located at the intersection of multiple modernities, art and science; the shift from art historical framings of form over matter and connoisseurship to viewing materiality as an active process that continues to map larger social processes and transformation will be discussed. Archives will be sites of investigation across varied Indigenous geographies marking place, space, bodies and land. This class is designed to introduce the latest methodologies in the field of art history, material culture and Indigenous Studies. Students will consult the archive, do hands-on evaluation of art, material culture, and expand their historic and theoretical knowledge about materiality. Beyond the theoretically and historically grounded critique this class provides, it will also introduce students to working with original documents and / or conduct on-site research. Students will consult the Cornell University library holdings of the Huntington Free Library's Native American Collection and conduct original archival research with historic and contemporary art and material culture at Haudenosaunee cultural centers, museums and exhibitions spaces through a class trip or individual visits (TBD).

class: ARTH 6850
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.

class: ARTH 6852
class title: Shadowplay: Asian Art and Performance
description: Shadowplay is a superb medium for storytelling. As with many performing arts in Asia, neither the highly stylized images of puppets, nor its musical, or linguistic complexity detract from its wide popularity. Why does an art that appears so obscure exercise such broad appeal? This seminar explores the playful and politically adept fluctuations of shadows across screens from India to Mainland and Island Southeast Asia. We will also briefly examine East Asian developments, particularly in China and Japan. In each of the countries where shadow theatre exists it has acquired its own repertory and a distinct technique and style of its own. This aesthetic has translated locally into paint, sculpture, architecture, cinema, and modern and contemporary installation art. Classes will meet regularly in the Herbert F. Johnson Museum.

class: AS 1102
class title: AS Advising Seminar
description: A course for students new to Cornell centered on interacting with their faculty advisor and other students in a small-group setting. Through exercises and/or short assignments, students will build awareness of resources to help them navigate their new environment. The seminar will facilitate a sense of community and identity as an A&amp;S student and provide a forum for faculty advisors to actively engage with their advisees throughout the first semester. Students will also have opportunities to attend workshops on a range of topics, including career development, building study skills, navigating the academic landscape, special academic programs, and thriving at Cornell.

class: AS 3112
class title: Milstein Independent Study
description: Independent study course for Milstein Program students.

class: AS 3113
class title: Milstein Studio
description: MStudio brings world-class speakers, faculty innovators, leading industry voices, and extraordinary Cornell alums to campus for public talks and conversations on tech and humanities as well as special immersive skills-based "short courses".

class: AS 3200
class title: Milstein Junior Project
description: Milstein Scholars undertake a year-long, independent study to deepen their understanding of the issues, topics, and technologies that interest them. What form these projects take -- research essay, video art, app development, etc. -- is up to the Scholar and their collaborators. Working with a faculty mentor in the field, juniors define and scope their projects in the fall and execute in the spring semester. This course culminates with the Milstein Expo in May.

class: AS 4999
class title: Indendent Study

class: ASIAN 1106
class title: FWS: The Great Epic of India
description: The great Sanskrit epic, the Mahabharata, is one of the principal monuments of world literature. This vast, enthralling, and powerful tale of intra-familial war and world historical decline (of which the famous Bhagavad Gita forms but a small part) transformed the religious and literary consciousness of India, and exercised a broad impact throughout South and Southeast Asia. This course will introduce students to this remarkable text and the literary tradition it inaugurated, through selected readings from the epic itself, along with samples of later renditions of its narrative (including contemporary theatrical, TV, and comic book versions).
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASIAN 1111
class title: FWS: Literature, Culture, Religion
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is about Asian Literature, Religion, and Culture and provides the opportunity to write extensively about these issues.  Topics vary by section and instructor.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASIAN 1112
class title: FWS: Allegories of Identity in Stories by Lu Xun and Feng Jicai
description: In times of national crisis, in times of cultural soul-searching, what role can literature play? Two celebrated Chinese writers of the twentieth century, Lu Xun (1881-1936) and Feng Jicai (1942-), sought answers to this question at pivotal historical moments, each contributing to his generation's search for a Chinese modern identity by writing stories. While both writers wrote in the mode of "literary realis," representing people's everyday experiences "as they really were in read life," they also employed allegory to embed other levels of meaning, figurative or symbolic, within their "true-to-life" narratives. Investigating, interpreting, and learning to write about these different levels of meaning will be the goal of our class lessons and discussions, our writing exercises and assignments.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASIAN 2208
class title: Introduction to Southeast Asia
description: What is Southeast Asia? How does this faraway, "exotic," region intersect with our realities? This course introduces key questions in the study of Southeast Asia (which includes Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam) and its diasporas using cinematic, literary, historical and scholarly materials. This introduction to Southeast Asia's historical, religious, literary, visual, and political traditions -- and the ways in which scholars have thought about them -- addresses a variety of themes  including notions of kinship, gender, political conflict, colonialism, media and the arts, sexuality, textual and visual genres, and forms of belief and belonging. Students will have an opportunity to investigate topics of interest to them, in the form of research essays as well as small-scale fieldwork, curatorial, or media projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2211
class title: Introduction to Japan
description: This course serves as a general introduction to the study of Japan in the humanities. Through literature, film, art, and pop culture, we will explore how "Japaneseness" and "Japanese culture" have historically been constructed, debated, and rethought from early history to the present from a variety of perspectives and academic disciplines. All texts will be available in English; no prior knowledge of Japanese language, history, or culture required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2233
class title: Introduction to China: Beyond China
description: "China" and "Chinese" are no longer adequate terms for the study of Sinitic-language communities and cultures that evince politically tenuous and linguistically polyphonic relations with the People's Republic of China. This course introduces students to transnational literatures, film, and popular culture from formerly marginalized Chinese voices, and to the field of Sinophone Studies as a critical, interdisciplinary alternative. Students will study fiction and films from Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, the United States, and the PRC, along with critical works explaining the ways that diaspora, colonialism, comparative empires, and ethnic or minority studies have informed the rise of global Chinese studies beyond "China" as a homogenous, static entity.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2245
class title: Gamelan in Indonesian History and Cultures
description: This course combines hands-on instruction in gamelan, Indonesia's most prominent form of traditional music, and the academic study of the broader range of music found in contemporary Indonesia, including Western-oriented and hybrid popular forms. Students thus engage with music directly, and use it as a lens to examine the myriad social and cultural forces that shape it, and that are shaped by it.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2261
class title: From Samurai to Superpower: Japan in World History I
description: How did Japan evolve from samurai to superpower?   We investigate this transformation in Japanese and world history over a two-semester sequence.  Students are free to enroll in either semester independently.  (All are welcome, but none required, to enroll in both semesters.)  We begin in early Japan: the birthplace of the sun goddess Amaterasu, the imperial court devoted to her, and the samurai who rose to rule under her sway.  Early Japan was also home to con-men and courtesans, mischievous gods and warring Buddhists, the world's first (and female!) novelist, and a surprisingly cosmopolitan culture of artists and scientists, comedians and entrepreneurs, human traffickers and international travelers.  Our first semester exploring this eclectic culture culminates in the early modern era (1600–1868), when under samurai rule, Japan developed many "modern" elements that laid the groundwork for the revolutionary changes and superpower status examined in the second semester.  We chart Japan's development not only through big events but also everyday life, delving into gender and sexuality, family and labor, arts and entertainment, and more.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2262
class title: Medicine and Healing in China
description: An exploration of processes of change in health care practices in China. Focuses on key transitions, such as the emergence of canonical medicine, of Daoist approaches to healing and longevity, of "scholar physicians," and of "traditional Chinese medicine" in modern China. Inquries into the development of healing practices in relation to both popular and specialist views of the body and disease; health care as organized by individuals, families, communities, and states; the transmission of medical knowledge; and healer-patient relations. Course readings include primary texts in translation as well as secondary materials.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2271
class title: China's Literary Heritage: An Introduction in Translation
description: This is an introductory course designed for, though not limited to, non-majors with or without any knowledge of Chinese language, history, or culture. It offers a guided survey of the history and development of major literary themes, genres, and traditions that still today are assumed to be an integral part of China's cultural identity. Readings include works of poetry, prose and fiction, all in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2273
class title: Religion and Ecological Sustainability
description: This course introduces the academic study of religion. This course serves as both an introduction to the academic study of religion and a survey of major topics in the intersections of religious communities and environmentally sustainable practices. Using real cases of environmentally sustainable, religiously oriented communities, we explore how myth, ritual, symbols, doctrines, and ideologies of time and space are activated in practical living decisions. This class involves readings of both primary sources, poetry and literature, secondary sources, films and site visits.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: ASIAN 2278
class title: East Asian Medical and Martial Arts
description: East Asian medicinal and martial arts, whether practiced in East Asia or in other parts of the world, have been important points of contact for people within and between often marginalized communities. In this course we will study the twentieth century development of East Asian combat and healing traditions, and the transport of those disciplines to the U.S. We will examine the personal, community, national, and global stakes of East Asian arts for those who invest in suppressing, teaching, and practicing them. We will consider how East Asian martial and medical practices relate, for example, to global and local histories of orientalism, colonialism, migration, and racism, and to historical post-colonial, anti-racist, feminist, and LGBTQ movements. Over the course of the semester, we will research martial and medical arts as they have been practiced in Ithaca, and place these local histories into their broader historical contexts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2279
class title: Chinese Mythology
description: Students will study Chinese myths from the earliest times. Focus will be on understanding how people have used myth to create and convey meaning, on examining the form Chinese myths take, and on considering how they are related to religion, literature, historical accounts, and intellectual trends.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2282
class title: Speculative Asias
description: This course explores Asian speculative literary fiction and cinema including early mythological influences, science fiction, and contemporary discourses of technoscientific progress. Students will examine the historical development of the broad genres in their specific contexts; the conceptual relations between realism, science, fantasy, and speculation; and ultimately, question past and future understandings of "Asia" as speculative.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2296
class title: Korea and East Asia
description: This course reexamines Korea's place in East Asia by studying transnational cultural and intellectual interactions that Korea has had with China and Japan. The course is divided into three parts. First, it examines Korea's centuries-long participation in the China-centered East Asian world order and its exit from that world order around the turn of the twentieth century. Second, it turns to Japan's emergence as an expansionist power in East Asia, replacing China's long-term hegemony in the region, and the diverse ways Koreans and other East Asians, including the Japanese, coped with the Japan-centered new formation of the East Asian world order in the first half of the twentieth century. Third, the course moves to contemporary Korea and investigates the impact of the so-called Korean Wave (the global popularity of Korean popular culture) on Japanese society and Korea-Japan relations, giving students a chance to think deeply about the effects of Japanese colonialism on contemporary Korea-Japan relations and the possible role of culture in smoothing over ongoing political and diplomatic tensions between the two neighboring countries.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2299
class title: Buddhism
description: This course will explore the Buddhist tradition from its origins in ancient India to its migrations throughout Asia and eventually to the West. The first part of the course will deal with Indian Buddhism: the Buddha, the principal teachings and practices of his early followers, and new developments in spiritual orientation. We will then turn to the transmission of Buddhism to Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, where at least one of the early schools has been preserved. Next we will look at Mahayana Buddhism as it moves north and east, encompassing China, Japan, and Tibet. While much of the course will be devoted to developments in traditional times, we will also look at some of the ways Buddhist cultures have responded to modernity.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 2951
class title: Foreign Policy as Subversion
description: To what extent does the ideal of the US as a vanguard for democracy and freedom in the world match up with other aspects—military, economic, and humanitarian—of US foreign policy? This same question about the degree to which discourses and practices correspond might be asked of other countries, like the Soviet Union, China, and Britain, but this course examines the ways in which US foreign policy has been deployed over the course of the twentieth century and the ways those policies have been perceived and received by people living in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Particular case studies will be addressed stemming from the faculty's specializations (for example, Vietnam, Cambodia, Guatemala, and Chile) and the emphasis is on the role of the United States in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Prominent themes will include forms of subversion, from military muscle to economic coercion, and how and why they have changed over time; meanings of liberty, democracy, freedom, and sovereignty in different places and times; popular responses to policies and actions of foreign administrations; the relationships between sovereign states and transnational corporations; the uses and abuses of History in the formulation and justification of policy initiatives and in local responses to them; and the complexities involved in discerning internal and external forces in an increasingly transnational world.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3305
class title: Seminar on American Relations with China
description: A historical review of the fragile and volatile U.S.-China relationship from the opening by Richard Nixon in the early 1970s until the present. Several individual sessions will be led by current or former executive branch or congressional officials, business people, journalists, representatives of nongovernmental organizations and others who have worked in China or have participated in the making of U.S. policy toward China.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3314
class title: Korean Literature and Performance: From P'ansori to K-Pop
description: This course examines Korean literature and performance traditions from the Chosŏn dynasty (1392-1910) to the present. Through performance workshops, the course enables students to experience how Korean epic and lyric traditions were performed in the past and how they continue to flourish in the present across various media, including recorded music, written texts, and film. We will examine how Korean literature and performance traditions have transformed over time, with attention given to how these traditions speak to local and global audiences following the Korean Wave. The course concludes with recent developments in Korean popular music, including K-pop bands and K-hip-hop. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korean culture is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3320
class title: Buddhist Meditation Traditions
description: This course will examine both the practice of and the ideology surrounding forms of meditation in Buddhist traditions from South, Southeast, and East Asia in premodern and contemporary times. We will explore early canonical accounts of the practice as well as later formulations that emerged as central foci of specific sectarian traditions. We will also discuss some modern scientific explorations of meditation practice and its increasing role as a psychotherapeutic tool.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3332
class title: The Barbarians
description: The idea of the barbarians is as old as civilization itself. But what is a barbarian, and what is the role that barbarians play, as the savage enemies of civilization? In this course we will address such questions by looking at how different civilizations have imagined their barbarians, ranging from their key role in Greek drama, and as infidels in religious conceptions, to Chinese walls, and American savagery. We will examine both historical examples, and the barbarians of today -- the terrorists and insurgents so often framed as dark and primitive, in contrast with ourselves. Through readings and visual materials, we will seek to discover what these barbarians have in common. We will look comparatively for the underlying patterns of history that the barbarians are drafted from, to draw a new picture of the barbarians. At the same time, we will arrive at a new understanding of civilization as such, as well as of the general nature of human inequality, and how it is justified.   
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some familiarity with issues and debates in anthropology, and/or social sciences generally.

class: ASIAN 3350
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3362
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ASIAN 3378
class title: Korean American Literature
description: The rapidly growing literature of the Korean diaspora is one of the most significant developments in Korean literature since the 20th century. As Korean literature has circulated as world literature, it has become more widely recognized in the Anglophone world through translation and through narratives written by Korean American authors. This course will explore Korean American literature and creative transpacific exchanges between Korea and the US, addressing issues of identity, language, place, migration, race discrimination, citizenship, and the ways in which storytelling shapes community. We will examine the vibrant dialogue between works of fiction and poetry across the Pacific, reading the work of Korean American authors alongside the writing of Korean authors working in the Korean language. Increasingly, Korean American writers are creating narratives that remember and reconfigure Korean history and Korea's relationship to the US, and we will explore narratives and poetry that offer new perspectives on the Japanese colonial period, the Korean War, and American imperialism such as Min Jin Lee's Pachinko, Chang-rae Lee's The Surrendered, and Don Mee Choi's DMZ Colony. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korea is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 3386
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective?  Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: ASIAN 4401
class title: Asian Studies Honors Course
description: Supervised reading and research on the problem selected for honors work.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Admission to honors program.

class: ASIAN 4402
class title: Asian Studies Honors: Senior Essay
description: The student, under faculty direction, prepares an honors essay.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: admission to honors program.

class: ASIAN 4403
class title: Supervised Reading
description: Intensive reading under the direction of a member of the staff.

class: ASIAN 4417
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASIAN 4442
class title: Shadowplay: Asian Art and Performance
description: Shadowplay is a superb medium for storytelling. As with many performing arts in Asia, neither the highly stylized images of puppets, nor its musical, or linguistic complexity detract from its wide popularity. Why does an art that appears so obscure exercise such broad appeal? This seminar explores the playful and politically adept fluctuations of shadows across screens from India to Mainland and Island Southeast Asia. We will also briefly examine East Asian developments, particularly in China and Japan. In each of the countries where shadow theatre exists it has acquired its own repertory and a distinct technique and style of its own. This aesthetic has translated locally into paint, sculpture, architecture, cinema, and modern and contemporary installation art. Classes will meet regularly in the Herbert F. Johnson Museum.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 4448
class title: China, Tibet and Xinjiang
description: Seminar intended to examine the increasingly complex relationship that has evolved between China and the rest of the international system, with particular focus on the rise of Chinese nationalism and the extent to which those in Tibet, Xinjiang, and, to a lesser extent, Taiwan, are contesting such a trend. In so doing, the course emphasizes the interrelated, yet often contradictory, challenges facing Beijing in regards to the task of furthering the cause of national unity while promoting policies of integration with international society and interdependence with the global economy.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ASIAN 4459
class title: History of Book in China
description: One of the pressing concerns for scholars of print culture is how to access the impact of print in the Chinese context. This course will examine the current scholarship on the history of Chinese books within a broader comparative framework of the history of book in general. The readings deal with the impact of print and the growth of book market on the intellectual, social, and political transformation of Chinese society, focusing on the culture and technology of printing as an indispensable condition of textual production, circulation, and reception. By suggesting the history of book not merely as the study of publishing and publishers but as an interdisciplinary approach to combine literary criticism, material culture, and history of the broader social conditions, this seminar aims to provide students an opportunity to conceive their own theoretical framework upon which more specialized research can be built.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 4483
class title: Videogames in East and Southeast Asia
description: While Japan used to dominate the Asian gaming landscape, its East Asian and Southeast Asian neighbors have since developed into major gaming hubs with distinctive characteristics. This course presents a historical and theoretical overview of the cultural, industrial, and technological aspects of videogames within the contexts of East and Southeast Asian nations from the 1970s to the present. Although this course is organized using nation as a unit, we will study the proposed topics not solely from a national perspective, but also through the lenses of transnational media flow and globalization to shed light on the factors that regionalize videogames as a cultural imagination and an industrial system in East and Southeast Asia.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASIAN 6612
class title: Japanese Bibliography and Research Methods
description: An introduction to the key reference and research works available for Japanese studies (both print and digital).  Uses of databases and reference works on a given theme will be modelled in the class hour.  Students will then practice with these resources for homework, according to their selected research projects, and report back on issues.  The course will also touch on book history.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Japanese language skills at the intermediate level or above.

class: ASIAN 6614
class title: Korean Literature and Performance: From P'ansori to K-Pop
description: This course examines Korean literature and performance traditions from the Chosŏn dynasty (1392-1910) to the present. Through performance workshops, the course enables students to experience how Korean epic and lyric traditions were performed in the past and how they continue to flourish in the present across various media, including recorded music, written texts, and film. We will examine how Korean literature and performance traditions have transformed over time, with attention given to how these traditions speak to local and global audiences following the Korean Wave. The course concludes with recent developments in Korean popular music, including K-pop bands and K-hip-hop. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korean culture is necessary.

class: ASIAN 6617
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.

class: ASIAN 6632
class title: The Barbarians
description: The idea of the barbarians is as old as civilization itself. But what is a barbarian, and what is the role that barbarians play, as the savage enemies of civilization? In this course we will address such questions by looking at how different civilizations have imagined their barbarians, ranging from their key role in Greek drama, and as infidels in religious conceptions, to Chinese walls, and American savagery. We will examine both historical examples, and the barbarians of today -- the terrorists and insurgents so often framed as dark and primitive, in contrast with ourselves. Through readings and visual materials, we will seek to discover what these barbarians have in common. We will look comparatively for the underlying patterns of history that the barbarians are drafted from, to draw a new picture of the barbarians. At the same time, we will arrive at a new understanding of civilization as such, as well as of the general nature of human inequality, and how it is justified.   
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some familiarity with issues and debates in anthropology, and/or social sciences generally.

class: ASIAN 6646
class title: Shadowplay: Asian Art and Performance
description: Shadowplay is a superb medium for storytelling. As with many performing arts in Asia, neither the highly stylized images of puppets, nor its musical, or linguistic complexity detract from its wide popularity. Why does an art that appears so obscure exercise such broad appeal? This seminar explores the playful and politically adept fluctuations of shadows across screens from India to Mainland and Island Southeast Asia. We will also briefly examine East Asian developments, particularly in China and Japan. In each of the countries where shadow theatre exists it has acquired its own repertory and a distinct technique and style of its own. This aesthetic has translated locally into paint, sculpture, architecture, cinema, and modern and contemporary installation art. Classes will meet regularly in the Herbert F. Johnson Museum.

class: ASIAN 6652
class title: Kingship and Statecraft in Asia: Angkor and Beyond
description: Kingship plays an outsize role in Asian countries today, in both democratic and authoritarian countries. Even in countries that abolished the monarchy, the legacy of kingship is very much at play. In this course we will study Asia's kingdoms, states, and empires, with attention to both tradition and present-day modern states. Focusing on kingship as both ideology and practice, we will study how states and monarchic traditions first came to be, including as Stranger-Kings, Buddhist monarchs, secondary state formation, local adaptations of foreign models, and more. We will examine examples such as China, from the ancient states and early empires to the legacy of empire there today; Cambodia and its Angkor empire modeled on Indian traditions; as well as Burma, Thailand, Japan, and other parts of Asia. Using readings, films, lectures and guest presentations, we will re-examine the role of kingship in Asia so as to enable a new understanding of both ancient, historical, and contemporary Asia. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some foundation in either Asian anthropology, archaeology, or history.

class: ASIAN 6660
class title: History of Book in China
description: One of the pressing concerns for scholars of print culture is how to access the impact of print in the Chinese context. This course will examine the current scholarship on the history of Chinese books within a broader comparative framework of the history of book in general. The readings deal with the impact of print and the growth of book market on the intellectual, social, and political transformation of Chinese society, focusing on the culture and technology of printing as an indispensable condition of textual production, circulation, and reception. By suggesting the history of book not merely as the study of publishing and publishers but as an interdisciplinary approach to combine literary criticism, material culture, and history of the broader social conditions, this seminar aims to provide students an opportunity to conceive their own theoretical framework upon which more specialized research can be built.

class: ASIAN 6683
class title: Videogames in East and Southeast Asia
description: While Japan used to dominate the Asian gaming landscape, its East Asian and Southeast Asian neighbors have since developed into major gaming hubs with distinctive characteristics. This course presents a historical and theoretical overview of the cultural, industrial, and technological aspects of videogames within the contexts of East and Southeast Asian nations from the 1970s to the present. Although this course is organized using nation as a unit, we will study the proposed topics not solely from a national perspective, but also through the lenses of transnational media flow and globalization to shed light on the factors that regionalize videogames as a cultural imagination and an industrial system in East and Southeast Asia.

class: ASIAN 6686
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective? Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.

class: ASIAN 7703
class title: Directed Research
description: Guided independent study for graduate students.

class: ASL 1101
class title: American Sign Language I
description: Students with no previous background in American Sign Language (ASL) will be introduced to basic conversational techniques in ASL, including both expressive and receptive skills.  Basic grammar and vocabulary will be covered, including explanations of the fundamental parts of a sign, proper use of fingerspelling, and the significance of non-manual features. Instruction will be supplemented with videos, allowing students to begin exploring the visual literature of the Deaf community in the United States. Readings and class discussions will acquaint students with American Deaf culture, history and education, and the historical development of ASL.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ASL 2201
class title: Intermediate American Sign Language I
description: This intermediate level course will focus on rigorous development and expansion of ASL vocabulary, non-manual signals, and grammar features through communicative activities. Students will develop ASL presentations to increase communicative fluency. The course provides continued development and discussion related to intercultural competence, ASL literature, ASL linguistics and American Deaf culture/community.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ASL 1102 or permission from lead ASL instructor.

class: ASL 3201
class title: ASL Literature
description: This course provides an overview of various genres in American Sign Language literature including narratives, folklore, ABC stories, poetry, translated works and visual vernacular. Students will analyze contents, themes and stylistic techniques of works done by various ASL literary artists. This course emphasizes critiquing various narrative and poetic genres with planning and development of new literary works.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B or higher in ASL 2201, or permission of lead ASL instructor.

class: ASRC 1201
class title: Elementary Arabic I
description: This two-course sequence assumes no previous knowledge of Arabic and provides a thorough grounding in the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. It starts with the alphabet and the number system and builds the four skills gradually and systematically through carefully selected and organized materials focusing on specific, concrete and familiar topics such as self identification, family, travel, food, renting an apartment, study, the weather, etc.). These topics are listed in the textbook's table of contents.  The student who successfully completes the two-course sequence will have mastered about 1000 basic words and will be able to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations on a limited range of practical topics such as self-identification, family, school, work, the weather, travel, etc., 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, passages of up to 180 words written in Arabic script, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 50-word paragraph in Arabic.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Novice to the Intermediate Mid level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ASRC 1203
class title: Intermediate Arabic I
description: In this two-course sequence learners continue to develop the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing and grammar foundation through the extensive use of graded materials on a wide variety of topics.  While more attention is given to developing native-like pronunciation and to grammatical accuracy than in ARAB 1201 and ARAB 1202, the main focus of the course will be on encouraging fluency and facility in understanding the language and communicating ideas in it.  The student who successfully completes this two-course sequence will have mastered over 1500 new words and will be able to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations related to a wide variety of topics beyond those covered in ARAB 1201 and ARAB 1202, such as the history and geography of the Arab world, food and health, sports, economic matters, the environment, politics, the Palestine problem, etc. 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, passages of up to 300 words, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 150-word paragraph in Arabic with fewer grammatical errors than in ARAB 1202.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Intermediate Mid to the Advanced Mid level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of Arabic or permission of instructor.

class: ASRC 1500
class title: Introduction to Africana Studies
description: At the inception of this department at Cornell University in 1969, the Africana Studies and Research Center became the birthplace of the field "Africana studies." Africana studies emphasizes comparative and interdisciplinary studies of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. In this course, we will look at the diverse contours of the discipline. We will explore contexts ranging from modernity and the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and plantation complex in the New World to processes of decolonization and globalization in the contemporary digital age. This course offers an introduction to the study of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. This course will examine, through a range of disciplines, among them literature, history, politics, philosophy, the themes - including race/racism, the Middle Passage, sexuality, colonialism, and culture - that have dominated Africana Studies since its inception in the late-1960s. We will explore these issues in an attempt to understand how black lives have been shaped in a historical sense; and, of course, the effects of these issues in the contemporary moment. This course seeks to introduce these themes, investigate through one or more of the disciplines relevant to the question, and provide a broad understanding of the themes so as to enable the kind of intellectual reflection critical to Africana Studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ASRC 1590
class title: History and Popular Culture in Africa
description: This course uses a multidisciplinary approach to explore the complex relationship between history and popular culture in Africa. The course considers two main questions - How can you write history using popular culture? And how do artists use history to create popular culture? It uses examples from around the continent to explore old and new forms of popular culture; forms of cultural expression used by historians; as well as the ways in which artists use moments of great historical significance or key historical actors in their works. We consider, for example, the work of Leroy Vail who used songs by Mozambican peasants to write a social history of colonialism as well as films about colonialism by African film-makers such as the late Ousman Sembene.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASRC 1650
class title: Philosophy of Race
description: This course offers an introduction to the philosophy of race. It canvasses key debates in the field concerning the metaphysical status of race, the relationship between the concept of race and racism (and the nature of the latter), the first-person reality of race, and the connections and disconnections between racial, ethnic, and national identities.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: ASRC 1812
class title: FWS: What is Blackness?
description: What is Blackness? Is it a monolith, or does it develop new features or identities as the African diaspora spreads to different parts of the globe? And why have thinkers written about Blackness in differing ways? We will explore the literature on race as it pertains to Blackness, including authors such as Cheikh Anta Diop, Frantz Fanon, Amilcar Cabral, Walter Rodney, and others. Students will have the opportunity to engage, study, and write about the various ways Blackness has been conceptualized.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASRC 1814
class title: WS: Ida B. Wells: In the Wake of Revolution
description: Heroine, Agitator, Crusader: these are but a few names used to describe journalist and activist Ida B. Wells (1862-1931).  Through extensive data collection and critical analysis, searing exposés against injustice and damning speeches, Wells and her contemporaries challenged the U.S. government to actualize the ideas of justice, citizenship, and human rights.  In this course, learning from the example set by Wells, we will contextualize her groundbreaking contributions within the broader historical framework of her era.  Students will compose essays that capture the essence of Wells's life and legacy.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASRC 1825
class title: FWS: Educational Innovations in Africa and Diaspora
description: This course deals with educational innovations geared to promoting equal opportunity based on gender, race and class, in Africa and the African Diaspora. After an introduction of the concepts and theories of education and innovations and the stages of innovation as planned change, the course will focus on concrete cases and different types of educational innovations. The selected case studies, in the United States, include the creation and expansion of historically black institutions with a focus on Tuskegee Institute (now Tuskegee University), Lincoln University, Spelman College, and the Westside Preparatory School in Chicago. The African cases to be studied include African languages for instruction in Nigeria, science education also in Nigeria, Ujamaa and education for self-reliance in Tanzania, classroom action research in Lesotho, Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) in African higher education with a focus on African Virtual Universities (AVU), the application of the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) in Côte d'Ivoire, and OnLine learning at the University of in South Africa (UNISA). The role of education in the making of the Afropolitan in the 21st Century is discussed.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASRC 1860
class title: FWS: A Dream, not a Nightmare: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Quest for Justice
description: What are your "dreams" and how do you articulate and communicate them to others, especially in writing? This course primarily serves as your writing laboratory with the objective of helping students think critically and write clearly as they seek to understand the ethical framework underpinning MLK's nonviolent active resistance and its applicability to our contemporary quest for justice. The primary text for this course is A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King Jr. which encompasses MLK's writings including his historic public addresses, letters, sermons, interviews, books, and essays that will serve as templates for learning various types of writings. This course challenges students to "dream" freely, think critically, and write clearly using the informal and formal writing assignments. 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ASRC 1985
class title: American History from 1500 to 1800
description: On the eve of the American Revolution Britain administered 26 colonies—not just the 13 that would become the United States. British North America's dramatic struggle for independence has led many history textbooks to read the revolution back into colonial history, focusing on those 13 North American colonies that would become the United States, often at the expense of global connections that defined the colonial and revolutionary periods. As this class will explore, key elements of early American history can only be understood through a broader perspective, from the economic growth of New England as a result of the African slave trade and exchange in the Caribbean, to the use of citizenship as a category of exclusion in response to the myriad inhabitants—European, Indigenous, and African—who neighbored or lived within the original 13 colonies. In this course, we will explore the history of early America from the 1490s through the 1800s from a global perspective. Voices usually peripheral to the narrative of American development, from enslaved African mariners to Spanish American nuns, will become central to processes of cultural encounter, labor exploitation, revolutionary upheavals, and state formation that shaped the making and unmaking early America.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2003
class title: Africa: The Continent and Its People
description: An introductory interdisciplinary course focusing on Africa's geographical, ecological, social and demographic characteristics; indigenous institutions and values; multiple cultural heritage of Africanity, Islam, Western civilization, and emerging Asian/Chinese influence. Main historical developments and transition;  contemporary political, economic, social and cultural change with technological factor. Africa's ties with the United States (from trans-Atlantic slavery to the present). Its impact on the emerging world order and its contribution to world civilization will also be explored.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2060
class title: Introduction to Africana Religions
description: This course explores the history of religions among people of African descent from the period of the development of the transatlantic slave trade (1440s) to the present. Its aim is to introduce students to the complex ways religion has shaped their lifeworlds. Such study involves, among other things, encounters with the religious cultures of slaves and slaveholders in the antebellum South; the development of independent Black churches, the effects of emancipation, migration, and urbanization upon Black religious life; new black religious movements (e.g., Nation of Islam, Father Divine's Peace Mission Movement, Black Hebrews); the emergence of Black secularism/humanism; the impact of Black religious expressive culture (e.g., music, sermon, song, and film); the religious dimensions of the Civil Rights and Black Power movements; as well as contemporary developments and transformations in Black religious life. All of which requires attentiveness to how we tell the story of Africana religions, and how scholars have developed and pursued the modern study of "Africana religion." 
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2105
class title: Arabic for Heritage Speakers
description: This course is designed for students who can speak and understand a spoken Arabic dialect (Egyptian, Lebanese, Syrian, Iraqi, etc.) but have little or no knowledge of written Arabic, known as Classical Arabic, Modern Standard Arabic, or Fusha. The focus of the course will be on developing the reading and writing skills through the use of graded, but challenging and interesting materials. As they develop their reading and writing skills, students will be learning about Arab history, society, and culture. Classroom activities will be conducted totally in Arabic. Students will not be expected or pressured to speak in Classical Arabic, but will use their own dialects for speaking purposes. However, one of the main goals of the course will be to help the development of the skills to communicate and understand Educated Spoken Arabic, a form of Arabic that is based on the spoken dialects but uses the educated vocabulary and structures of Fusha.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 2235
class title: New Visions in African Cinema
description: This undergraduate course introduces the formal and topical innovations that African cinema has experienced since its inception in the 1960s. Sections will explore, among others, Nollywood, sci-fi, and ideological cinema. Films include: Abderrahmane Sissako's Bamako, Mohamed Camara's Dakan, Djibril Diop Mambéty's Touki-Bouki, Cheikh Oumar Sissoko's Finzan, Anne-Laure Folly's Women with Open Eyes, Ousmane Sembène's Camp de Thiaroye, Jean-Pierre Bekolo's Quartier Mozart.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 2354
class title: African American Visions of Africa
description: This seminar examines some of the political and cultural visions of Africa and Africans held by African-American intellectuals and activists in the 19th and 20th centuries. Emphasis is placed on the philosophies of black nationalism, Pan Africanism and anticolonialism and the themes of emigration, expatriation, repatriation and exile. Awareness of Africa and attitudes toward the continent and its peoples have profoundly shaped African-American identity, culture and political consciousness. Notions of a linked fate between Africans and black Americans have long influenced black life and liberation struggles within the U.S. The motives, purposes and outlooks of African-American theorists who have claimed political, cultural, or spiritual connection to Africa and Africans have varied widely, though they have always powerfully reflected black experiences in America and in the West. The complexity and dynamism of those views belie simplistic assumptions about essential or "natural" relationships, and invite critical contemplation of the myriad roles that Africa has played in the African-American mind."
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2452
class title: Dress, Cloth and Identity in Africa and the Diaspora
description: This course uses a multi-disciplinary approach to examine the importance of textiles in African social and economic history. It combines art history, anthropology, social and economic history to explore the role of textiles in marking status, gender, political authority and ethnicity. In addition, we examine the production and distribution of indigenous cloth and the consequences of colonial rule on African textile industries. Our analysis also considers the principles of African dress and clothing that shaped the African diaspora in the Americas as well as the more recent popularity and use of African fabrics and dress in the United States.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2603
class title: The Novels of Toni Morrison
description: Each year this seven-week, one-credit course focuses on a different novel by Nobel Laureate and Cornell alumna Toni Morrison. We read and discuss each novel in the context of Morrison's life and career, her place in African American, US, and world literature, and her exploration of crucial questions regarding identity, race, gender, history, oppression, and autonomy. Please see the class roster for the current semester's featured novel. Students will read the novel closely, with attention to its place in Morrison's career and in literary and cultural history.

class: ASRC 2650
class title: Introduction to African American Literature
description: This course will introduce students to African American literary traditions in the space that would become North America. From early freedom narratives and poetry to Hip-Hop and film, we will trace a range of artistic conventions and cultural movements while paying close attention to broader historical shifts in American life over the past three centuries. We'll read broadly: poetry, fiction, speculative fiction, newspapers, and the like. We will ask: How do authors create, define, and even exceed a tradition? What are some of the recurring themes and motifs within this tradition? Authors may include: Phillis Wheatley, David Walker, Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, W.E.B. DuBois, Zora Neale Hurston, James Baldwin, Octavia Butler, Toni Morrison, and Eve Ewing. This course satisfies the Literatures of the Americas requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (D-AG)

class: ASRC 2674
class title: History of the Modern Middle East
description: This course examines major trends in the evolution of the Middle East in the modern era. Focusing on the 19th and 20th centuries and ending with the "Arab Spring," we will consider Middle East history with an emphasis on five themes: imperialism, nationalism, modernization, Islam, and revolution. Readings will be supplemented with translated primary sources, which will form the backbone of class discussions.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2755
class title: Race and Slavery in the Early Atlantic World
description: The legacies of slavery remain all too obvious in the modern Atlantic World. From demographic imbalances to pervasive social and economic inequality, much of the recent past has involved addressing that destructive early modern heritage. This course traces the roots of slavery and race in the Atlantic World from 1400 to 1800. Through lectures, readings, and class discussion, we will examine how politics, culture, gender, and the law intersected to shape the institution of slavery and the development of conceptions of race. As an Atlantic World course, we will take a comparative perspective and ask how different imperial regimes (Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English) fostered different systems of race and slavery in the Americas. We will also ask how the law as a lived experience, gender norms, and imperial politics all worked to shape the production of racial hierarchies.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: ASRC 2771
class title: Africa in Hollywood
description: In Eddie Murphy's Coming to America, Africa is a place of nobility, where even lions are at peace with lambs. In contrast, Leonardo DeCaprio's Blood Diamond is a violent look at the role the demand for diamonds has played in destabilizing mineral-rich African countries. But if Hollywood has long been concerned with depicting Africa in particular ways, African filmmakers are at the same time creating their own stories. Popular and scholarly film critics are also contributing to the battle over who speaks for Africa. In this course we will explore these competing images of Africa, questions of imagination versus reality, and the extent to which artists should, if at all, be responsible to the subject of their art.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 2955
class title: Socialism in America
description: "Why no socialism in America?" Scholars and activists have long pondered the relative dearth (compared to other industrialized societies) of sustained, popular, anticapitalist activity in the United States. Sure, leftist movements in the U.S. have often looked and operated differently than those in other parts of the world. But many Americans have forged creative and vibrant traditions of anticapitalism under very difficult circumstances. This class examines socialist thought and practice in the U.S. from the 19th century to the present. We trace intersections of race, class, and gender while exploring the freedom dreams of those who have opposed capitalism in the very heart of global power.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASRC 3060
class title: Emotions, Religion, and Race
description: This course explores past and contemporary theories of emotions and different kinds of emotions like wonder, grief, anger, and fear, all with an eye toward the study and practice of religion, and its relationship to race, gender, class, and politics. We will also explore how the academic study of religion and different religious tradition impact our understanding of emotions. We will draw from philosophy, anthropology, sociology, literature, political science, affect theory, gender studies, psychology, and neuroscience. We will examine several questions related to emotions and its rise. First and foremost, what is an emotion? How is it different from affect, feeling, or passion? How are emotions investigated across disciplines?  Can we study emotion historically? How are certain emotions racialized or gendered? What is a religious experience? How identifying as religious or otherwise impact one's understanding and experience of emotions? How do emotions lend force to ideas and ideologies, to causes such as the recent surge of White (Christian) nationalist sentiment in the U.S. and other countries? Finally, what do emotions (and affect theory) bring to the study of religion?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ASRC 3100
class title: Advanced Arabic I
description: In this two-semester sequence, learners will be introduced to authentic, unedited Arabic language materials ranging from short stories, and poems, to newspaper articles dealing with social,  political,  and cultural issues. Emphasis will be on developing fluency in oral expression through discussions of issues presented in the reading and listening selections. There will be more focus on the development of native-like pronunciation and accurate use of grammatical structures than in the previous four courses. A primary objective of the course is the development of the writing skill through free composition exercises in topics of interest to individual students.  This course starts where ARAB 2202 leaves off and continues the development of the four language skills and grammar foundation using 18 themes, some new and some introduced in previous courses but are presented here at a more challenging level.  The student who successfully completes this two-course sequence have mastered over 3000 new words and will be able, within context of the 18 new and recycled themes to: 1) understand and actively participate in conversations, 2) read and understand, with the help of a short list of words, authentic, unedited passages of up to 400 words, and 3) discuss orally in class and write a 300-word paragraph in Arabic with fewer grammatical errors than in ARAB 2202.  The two-course sequence aims to take the student from the Advanced Mid to the Superior level according to the ACTFL proficiency guidelines.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ASRC 2200 or permission of instructor.

class: ASRC 3322
class title: Gospel and The Blues: A Black Women's History I, 1900-1973
description: In her pathbreaking text Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval Saidiya Hartman writes that "young Black women were radical thinkers who tirelessly imagined other ways to live and never failed to consider how the world might be otherwise." This two-semester course endeavors to travel through those worlds using the cultural and musical forms of gospel and the blues as our compass. The first semester is guided by the work of scholars and writers like Angela Davis, Hazel Carby, Alice Walker, and Gayl Jones and artists like Ethel Waters, Bessie Smith, Victoria Spivey, and Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Together we will interrogate the spectrum of lived experiences making for a kaleidoscopic sonic history of joy, pleasure, sorrow, resistance, and everything in between.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 3653
class title: International Development in African History
description: This lecture course examines the history of the idea and practice of development in twentieth century Africa. Since the 1990s, the US, with some input from other western nations, has had relative hegemony in defining "international development." But this state of affairs was not inevitable – in the 1950s-1970s, decolonizing African nations hosted major debates on how to develop an independent, post-colonial system. Development theorists, academics, and freedom fighters traversed the continent and congregated in intellectual hubs, especially in Tanzania, but also in Nigeria, Mozambique, Senegal, Zambia, and elsewhere, to plan and implement a new world order. This course will combine intellectual and social history: we will explore theories of development, and situate them in their vibrant context.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: ASRC 3705
class title: Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes
description: This course offers an opportunity to read in depth two major writers of the twentieth century, Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston.  Friends and one-time collaborators in the New York City of the 1920s, each had important careers that extended long after the Harlem Renaissance period in which they achieved early renown.  This class will survey the myriad genres in which each writer worked (short stories, poetry, novels, drama, critical writing, folklore and anthropology).  And it will also consider the literary, cultural, and political contexts in which both writers achieved early renown and which their work critically contested.  The class concludes by examining the reading works of later major authors (Toni Morrison, Harryette Mullen) who drew directly with Hughes' and Hurston's legacy.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 3742
class title: Africans and African Americans in Literature
description: When an African and an African American meet, solidarity is presumed, but often friction is the result.  In this course, we will consider how Africans and African Americans see each other through literature.  What happens when two peoples suffering from double consciousness meet?  We will examine the influence of historical forces including slavery, colonialism and pan-Africanism on the way writers explore the meeting between Africans and African Americans. Specifically we will look at how writers and political figures such as Maya Angelou, Chimamanda Adichie, Richard Wright, Eugene Robinson, Philippe Wamba, Martin Luther King Junior and Malcolm X have understood the meeting.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 3947
class title: Race and World Politics
description: This course introduces students to questions and debates around the role and effects of race and racism in international politics.  Scholars of international politics have long neglected such questions in world affairs, even though the origins of international relations – as an academic discipline – can be traced back to the early years of the 20th century, when questions of imperialism and governance over different races necessitated the development of new ways of thinking about inter-state and inter-racial relations. Over the past two decades, however, prompted by insights from post-colonial theory and cultural studies but also by continued Western military engagements in the Middle East and Africa, new scholarly publications have sought to bring back the analysis of "the color line" into our conversations about global politics. The major themes covered in this course include critical debates around the meanings and salience of race; colonialism; race and IR; decolonization and Third Worldism; race and war on/and terror; and race and international law and climate justice.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ASRC 4212
class title: Black Women's Autobiography in the 21st Century WritingHerStory
description: Black women first began to shape the genre of autobiography during antebellum era slavery. They were prolific in developing the genre of autobiography throughout the twentieth century, to the point of emerging as serial autobiographers in the case of Maya Angelou. Significantly, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1970), the first autobiography of six by Angelou, along with autobiographies by a range of other black women writers, helped to launch the renaissance in black women's literature and criticism in African American literature during the 1970s. In this course, we will focus on how black women have continued to write and share their personal stories in the new millennium by examining autobiographies that they have produced in the first years of the twenty-first century. More broadly, we will consider the impact of this writing on twenty-first century African American literature, as well as African diasporan writing in Africa and the Caribbean. In the process, we will draw on a range of critical and theoretical perspectives.  We will read memoirs and autobiographies by a range of figures, including Michelle Obama, Jennifer Lewis, Monica Coleman, Serena Williams, Gabrielle Union, and Tiffany Haddish, among others. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 4368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG, LA-AG)

class: ASRC 4672
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: ASRC 4900
class title: Honors Thesis
description: For senior Africana Studies majors working on honors thesis, with selected reading, research projects, etc., under the supervision of a member of the Africana Studies and Research Center faculty.

class: ASRC 4902
class title: Independent Study
description: For students working on special topics, with selected reading, research projects, etc., under the supervision of a member of the Africana Studies and Research Center faculty.

class: ASRC 6132
class title: Mobility, Circulation, Migration, Diaspora: Global Connections
description: This graduate seminar seeks to familiarize students with some of the most recent takes on transnational history that have emphasized the experiences of individuals and groups whose lives were affected by mobility across political boundaries. An explicit aim of the seminar is to use these border-crossing lives as a way to develop a critique of conventional areas studies frameworks and to explore the possibilities of imagining (geographically and otherwise) a different world (or multiple different ways of organizing global space). Since most of the readings will concentrate on the pre-nineteenth century world, the seminar will also offer students tools to rethink conventional narratives of the rise of a globalized world that tend to emphasize the second half of the nineteenth century as the birth of the global world. Globalization, this course will demonstrate, was happening long before most accepted narratives assert.

class: ASRC 6368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought. 

class: ASRC 6900
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent study course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ASRC 6902
class title: Africana Studies Graduate Seminar
description: This class is the first in a two-part course sequence offered in the fall and spring semesters annually. In this hybrid theory and methods course, students will read historiographic, ethnographic, and sociological engagements about African-descended people throughout the Diaspora.

class: ASTRO 1101
class title: From New Worlds to Black Holes
description: "From Black Holes to undiscovered worlds" - a journey through our fascinating universe. Ever wondered about the universe? What you see in the night sky? How stars get born and how they die? How Black holes work? And if there is life out there in the universe? Join us for a journey through our fascinating universe from Black Holes to undiscovered worlds through the newest discoveries. We are made of stardust. Ad Astra.
 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ASTRO 1195
class title: Observational Astronomy
description: Provides a "hands-on" introduction to observational astronomy intended for liberal arts students. High school mathematics is assumed, but otherwise there are no formal prerequisites. The course objective is to learn how we know what we know about the Universe, and to learn how to observe with moderate cost amateur telescopes. There are two lectures and one evening laboratory per week. Typically, labs consist of 4-5 observing sessions using the Fuertes Observatory 12" telescope and a set of Meade 8" telescopes, a trip to Mount Pleasant to look through its 25" telescope and, on cloudy nights, 4-5 in-class experiments, the highlight of which is collecting micrometeorites for study.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ASTRO 2202
class title: A Spacecraft Tour of the Solar System: Science, Policy and Exploration
description: Writing course designed to develop an understanding of modern solar system exploration. Discussion will center on describing our home planet as a member of a diverse family of objects in our solar system. In addition to studying what we have learned of other planets and satellites from unmanned spacecraft, we will also discuss the missions themselves and describe the process of how they are selected and developed. Guest lecturers will include political advocacy experts, NASA officials, and science team members of active NASA/ESA missions. Participants will study, debate, and learn to write critically about important issues in science and public policy that benefit from this perspective. Topics discussed include space policy, the potential for life in the ocean worlds of the outer solar system, the search for extrasolar planets and extraterrestrial intelligence, and the exploration of Mars.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ASTRO 2211
class title: Astronomy: Stars, Galaxies, and Cosmology
description: Course surveying the evolution of the universe from the Big Bang onwards: what happens in the first few minutes of the universe's life; star formation, structure, and evolution; the physics of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes; galaxy formation and structure; and cosmology. The roles of quantum physics, particle physics, and relativity in astrophysics are discussed (no prior knowledge of these is assumed). The course is more in-depth than ASTRO 1101. All course materials are made available online.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory calculus or co-registration in MATH 1110 or MATH 1910 or permission of instructor.

class: ASTRO 3301
class title: Exoplanets and Planetary Systems
description: More than five thousand planets circling other stars have been discovered over the past two decades, and many more discoveries are sure to come. With the recent launch of the James Webb Space Telescope (Dec 2021) astronomers will be able to probe the atmosphere of potential Earth-like planets for the first time.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112 or PHYS 1116 and PHYS 2213 or PHYS 2217, MATH 1120, MATH 1910  or MATH 1920 or permission of instructor.

class: ASTRO 3303
class title: Galaxies Across Cosmic Time
description: This course provides an overview of our current understanding of how galaxies have evolved over the last 13+ billion years and how their evolution has been influenced by their local intergalactic environment. We will look at the evidence that links supermassive black holes, gas accretion and merger events to galaxy evolution and track the star formation rate from early to current epochs. Additional topics will include the formation and distribution of clusters and groups of galaxies, the importance of dark matter and how galaxy evolution fits into the framework of current cosmological models.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1120, MATH 1910, or MATH 1920, PHYS 1112, PHYS 1116, or PHYS 2217 or permission of instructor.

class: ASTRO 4410
class title: Multiwavelength Astronomical Techniques
description: The course covers methods in optical and radio astronomy and selected topics in astrophysics. Major experiments use techniques chosen from charge-coupled device (CCD) imaging, optical photometry, optical spectroscopy, radiometry and radio spectroscopy. Observations use the Hartung-Boothroyd Observatory's 24-inch telescope and a 3.8-meter radio telescope on the roof of the Space Sciences Building. The course covers the fundamentals of astronomical instrumentation and data analysis applied to a wide range of celestial phenomena: asteroids, main-sequence stars, supernova remnants, globular clusters, planetary nebulae, the interstellar medium, OH masers, and galaxies. Methods include statistical data analysis, artifact and interference excision, Fourier transforms, heterodyned receivers, and software-defined radio.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 2214 and PHYS 2218 or PHYS 3310 or PHYS 3360, PHYS 3327. Recommended prerequisite: ASTRO 3310 or ASTRO 3334 or permission of instructor.

class: ASTRO 4431
class title: Physics of Stars, Neutron Stars and Black Holes
description: Major topics include: the structure and evolution of stars; solar neutrino astronomy; stellar seismology; the physics of white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes; the physics of low mass stars and connection to planets. Basic ideas in atomic and molecular physics, condensed matter physics, nuclear and particle physics, fluid mechanics and general relativity are introduced in a practical fashion that emphasizes concepts useful for understanding astrophysical phenomena.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: mathematics above 2000 level, physics above 3000 level.

class: ASTRO 4445
class title: Introduction to General Relativity
description: One-semester introduction to general relativity that develops the essential structure and phenomenology of the theory without requiring prior exposure to tensor analysis. General relativity is a fundamental cornerstone of physics that underlies several of the most exciting areas of current research, including relativistic astrophysics, cosmology, and the search for a quantum theory of gravity. The course briefly reviews special relativity, introduces basic aspects of differential geometry, including metrics, geodesics, and the Riemann tensor, describes black hole spacetimes and cosmological solutions, and concludes with the Einstein equation and its linearized gravitational wave solutions. At the level of Gravity: An Introduction to Einstein's General Relativity by Hartle.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SMR-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: classical mechanics at the level of PHYS 3318 and special relativity at the level of PHYS 1116 or PHYS 2216.

class: ASTRO 4940
class title: Independent Study in Astronomy
description: Individuals work on selected topics. A program of study is devised by the student and instructor.

class: ASTRO 6509
class title: General Relativity I
description: A comprehensive introduction to Einstein's theory of relativistic gravity. This course focuses on the formal structure of the theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of special relativity and methods of dynamics at level of Classical Mechanics by Goldstein.

class: ASTRO 6531
class title: Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics
description: This course will survey fluid dynamics (including magnetohydrodynamics and some plasma physics) important for understanding astronomical phenomena. Topics include basic fluid and MHD concepts and equations, waves and instabilities of various types (e.g., sound, gravity, Rossby, hydromagnetic, spiral density waves; Rayleigh-Taylor, thermal, Jeans, rotational, magnetorotational instabilities), shear and viscous flows, turbulence, shocks and blast waves, etc. These topics will be discussed in different astrophysical contexts and applications, such as atmosphere and ocean, star and planet formation, compact objects, interstellar medium, galaxies and clusters.

class: ASTRO 6560
class title: Physics of Stars, Neutron Stars and Black Holes
description: Major topics include: the structure and evolution of stars; solar neutrino astronomy; stellar seismology; the physics of white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes; the physics of low mass stars and connection to planets. Basic ideas in atomic and molecular physics, condensed matter physics, nuclear and particle physics, fluid mechanics and general relativity are introduced in a practical fashion that emphasizes concepts useful for understanding astrophysical phenomena.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: physics at the advanced undergraduate-level.

class: ASTRO 6579
class title: Advanced Astrodynamics
description: A graduate level course in astrodynamics and trajectory design. Course topics include a brief review of the two body problem, impulsive transfers, and perturbations; orbit determination and one-way ranging; algebraic and symplectic mappings and surfaces of section; the circular and elliptical 3-body problem, invariant manifolds and 3-body orbit design; secular and resonant perturbations; finite and continuous thrust modeling and transfer design. The course will emphasize numerical methods and building deep understanding of modern approaches to orbital design problems. Familiarity with basic orbital mechanics (at the level of MAE 4060 or equivalent) and numerical integration of dynamical systems will be assumed.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the evolution of orbits of spacecraft and natural bodies in response to various forces., Students will be able to simulate and fit natural orbits and spacecraft trajectories using a variety of computational tools., Students will be able to understand the inner workings of modern orbit design and analysis tools., Students will be able to understand the dynamical behavior of planetary systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: advanced undergraduate course in dynamics.

class: ASTRO 6599
class title: Cosmology
description: Intended to provide a detailed theoretical development of current ideas in cosmology. Topics include Big Bang cosmology and the universe's matter content; a cosmological chronology of the very early universe, symmetry breaking, inflationary scenarios, nucleosynthesis, recombination, growth of irregularities, galaxy formation and clustering, dark energy; current and future cosmological observational approaches.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistical physics, quantum mechanics, and electromagnetic theory courses.

class: ASTRO 6940
class title: Advanced Study and Research
description: Guided reading and seminars on topics not currently covered in regular courses.

class: ASTRO 7600
class title: First Year Graduate Advising Seminar

class: ASTRO 7683
class title: Seminar: Astronomy and Planetary Science
description: This course is a reading seminar where graduate students will gain astronomy breadth, practice public speaking, and distill important results from seminal astronomy research papers.

class: ASTRO 7690
class title: Computational Physics
description: Covers numerical methods for ordinary and partial differential equations, linear algebra and eigenvalue problems, integration, nonlinear equations, optimization, and fast Fourier transforms. Find out how and why the "black-box" numerical routines you use work, how to improve and generalize them, and how to fix them when they don't. Based on the text Numerical Recipes by William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery.

class: BCS 1131
class title: Elementary Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian I
description: By the end of this course, you will be able to carry on basic conversations in Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian on many topics from your daily life. You should be able to make polite requests, ask for information, respond to requests and descriptions, impart personal information, and have simple discussions on familiar topics. You will also acquire the skills to read and understand simple informational texts, such as newspaper headlines and menus, announcements and advertisements, and to extract the general idea of longer informational texts. You will master the writing systems of the languages, and you should be able to write notes or simple letters and keep a journal.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: BCS 2133
class title: Intermediate Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian I
description: The intermediate course in BCS is a continuation of the elementary course and is intended to enhance overall communicative competence in the language. This course moves forward from the study of the fundamental systems and vocabulary of the Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian to rich exposure to the spoken and written language with the wide range of speakers and situations. The goal of the course is to give students practice in comprehension, speaking, and composition, while broadening their vocabulary and deepening their understanding of grammar and syntax. The course will focus on the following skills: conversation, writing, role-playing, interviewing, and summarizing. To develop these skills the students will be assigned dialogues, language exercises, translations, descriptions, summaries, and a final independent project.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BCS 1132 or equivalent.

class: BEE 2510
class title: Engineering Processes for Environmental Sustainability
description: Students will quantitatively understand and analyze environmental issues such as: the impact of industrial contaminants and excess nutrients on water quality; the global carbon cycle; improving global access to clean water. This course integrates principles from chemistry, biology, math and engineering to understand and solve real-world problems that impact three major environmental compartments: air, water, and soil. Students will solve mass and energy balances beginning with simple, closed systems, then progress through reactive, open systems to describe environmental fate and transport of pollutants, natural environmental cycles and remediation scenarios. Students will be exposed to technical and lay material from interdisciplinary sources to understand the environmental externalities – social, political, economic and cultural – that must be considered when proposing solutions to today's most pressing environmental issues. BE and EnvE students must complete either BEE 2510 or BEE 2600 according to their academic plan. Students who complete both BEE 2510 and BEE 2600 receive engineering credit toward their degree for only one of these courses.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will improve their ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions (ABET 6)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090 or AP Chem. Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930.

class: BEE 2600
class title: Principles of Biological Engineering
description: Focuses on the integration of biological principles with engineering, math, and physical principles. Students learn how to formulate equations for biological systems in class and practice in homework sets. Topics range from molecular principles of reaction kinetics and molecular binding events to macroscopic applications such as energy and mass balances of bioprocessing and engineering design of implantable sensors. Students will also experience scientific literature searches as related to the biological engineering topics, and critical analysis and evaluation of relevant information sources. BEE students must complete either BEE 2510 or BEE 2600 according to their academic plan. BEE students who complete both BEE 2510 and BEE 2600 receive engineering credit for only one of these courses.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will improve their ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions (ABET 6)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930, two semesters of core biology major classes (BIOMG 1350, BIOG 1440, BIOG 1445 or BIOEE 1610 ) plus BIOG 1500 or equivalent.

class: BEE 3280
class title: Systems and Synthetic Biology for Sustainable Energy
description: The world today is in a state of enormous transition. In the coming few decades, billions of people will leave poverty and enter the developed world. This unprecedented development will be one of the greatest opportunities ever presented to improve global public health and quality of life, but it will only be realized if it's done right. The challenge of sustainable energy is not just to provide energy without polluting the atmosphere with fossil carbon, but to do so at a global scale at a cost that everyone can afford. Thanks to capabilities ranging from room temperature and pressure catalysis to self-assembly, biology offers first draft solutions to problems in sustainable energy from the safe use of nuclear energy, the capture and storage of solar power, mining and purifying elements critical for sustainable energy technologies like rare earths and even in the construction of advanced materials. In each class we will discuss a set of scientific journal articles and use these discuss the advantages, disadvantages and potential of biology in applications in sustainable energy. Inthe past, we have used these discussions to write a scientific article with students as co-authors.
outcome: Find, evaluate, and integrate biochemical data on enzymatic reactions from multiple online sources., Combine integrated biochemical data, numerical models, and back of the envelope calculations to assess the feasibility of a chosen sustainability technology., Graduate students will learn how to lead a group writing project that describes mathematical assessment of the mathematical assessment of a chosen sustainability technology., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOG 1440 or equivalent, BIOMG 3300 or equivalent, MATH 2930, and MATH 2940.

class: BEE 3310
class title: Bio-Fluid Mechanics
description: Properties of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids; hydrostatic and dynamic forces; principles of continuity, conservations of mass, energy and momentum and their applications; laminar and turbulent flows, introduction to Navier Stokes; dimensional analysis and similarity; internal and external bio-fluid examples will be covered e.g. blood circulatory systems and animal locomotion.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science and mathematics (ABET 1)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910, MATH 1920, MATH 2930, ENGRD 2020 and basic knowledge in complex numbers.

class: BEE 3500
class title: Heat and Mass Transfer in Biological Engineering
description: Focuses on understanding the principles of heat and mass transfer in the context of biological (biomedical/bioprocessing/bioenvironmental) systems. Emphasizes physical understanding of transport processes with application examples from plant, animal and human biology, the bioenvironment (soil/water/air), and industrial processing of food and biomaterials.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will improve their ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930 and BEE 3310 or equivalent.

class: BEE 4270
class title: Water Measurement and Analysis Methods
description: Managing soil and water resources requires monitoring. In this field-based lab course, you learn techniques to quantify water flow in surface and subsurface environments and monitor water quality in lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Soil health considerations, measurement accuracy, and water sampling quality assurance are discussed. The final project involves designing a water quality monitoring plan for a research or industrial site.
outcome: Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will improve their ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions (ABET 6)., 

class: BEE 4310
class title: Environmental Statistics and Learning
description: This course introduces relatively simple but powerful data analysis techniques needed to analyze and model complex datasets frequently encountered in the environmental sciences. The course covers both supervised and unsupervised learning techniques, including linear regression, penalized regression, generalized linear models, local regression, and principal component analysis. These topics are introduced through applications to data from various environmental fields. The course serves as a first course in applied statistics and machine learning for students with only a basic knowledge of probability and statistics, and will provide a review of the mathematical concepts needed to understand the techniques presented. Students will learn by doing, with ample time in class to practice translating theory to application through programming exercises on real environmental datasets.
outcome: Apply supervised and unsupervised learning techniques in modern programming languages., Interpret and communicate statistical analyses of data to support scientific discovery and advance engineering solutions in environmental fields., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700, or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 4560
class title: Ecological Mechanics
description: Ecological mechanics explores ecological relations from a mechanics perspective, including fluid, solid, structural mechanics, and heat and mass transport. While other ecological studies incorporate transport of mass, energy, and information, consideration of momentum transport and its consequence in biotic and abiotic relations in organisms is unique to this discipline. We begin the course by introducing the fundamental and advanced concepts in mechanics. Then we will learn how to incorporate these concepts by considering response function (the functional relationship between condition imposed on the system and its response) to understand and predict ecological phenomena such as predator-prey relation and pattern formation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses or their equivalent: ENGRD 2020, BEE 3310, BEE 3500, and BEE 3400 or equivalent.

class: BEE 4590
class title: Physical Design in Biological Engineering
description: Students will choose a project depending on their interests, and complete the project goal by integrating the knowledge of biology, physics, and engineering. Students will present their proposal and final results, and write a report at the end of the semester.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112, or permission of instructor. Corequisite: ENGRC 4590 (College of Engineering technical communications requirement).

class: BEE 4730
class title: Watershed Engineering
description: Teaches basic engineering design and analysis as practiced for water control and nonpoint source pollution prevention. Discusses the origins of design approaches, including their theoretical bases and recent or emerging methods and concepts. Most of the course is dedicated to practicing applied design. Assignments are generally representative of real-life engineering problems and involve as much hands-on experience as possible. Some example topics include risk analysis, water conveyance, stormwater management, including green infrastructure and low-impact development.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3310 or BEE 3710 or an equivalent hydrology course.

class: BEE 4750
class title: Environmental Systems Analysis
description: Applications of mathematical modeling, simulation, and optimization to environmental systems planning and management. Fate and transport models for contaminants in air, water, and soil. Optimization methods (search techniques, linear programming, integer programming) to evaluate alternatives for power systems, solid waste management, and water and air pollution control. Introduction to the impact of uncertainty on solutions and risk assessment through simulation.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BEE 2510 or BEE 2600, ENGRD 2700 or equivalent, CEE 3200 or equivalent; or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 4800
class title: Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Global Change
description: This course investigates the science of atmospheric chemistry as its relation to air pollution and global change. Students examine the chemistry and physics that determines atmospheric composition on local to global scales including the effects of biogeochemistry and atmospheric photochemistry.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090, MATH 1920, and PHYS 1112 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 4970
class title: Individual Study in Biological and Environmental Engineering
description: Special work in any area of biological and environmental engineering on problems under investigation by the department or of special interest to the student, provided, in the latter case, that adequate facilities can be obtained.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: adequate ability and training for work proposed.

class: BEE 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching
description: The student assists in teaching a biological and environmental engineering course appropriate to his or her previous training. The student meets with a discussion or laboratory section, prepares course materials, grades assignments, and regularly discusses objectives and techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.

class: BEE 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Research in any area of biological or environmental engineering on problems under investigation by the department or of special interest to the student, provided that adequate facilities can be obtained. The student must review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, carry out an approved plan, and submit a formal final report.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: adequate training for work proposed.

class: BEE 4993
class title: Honors Thesis
description: Intended for students pursuing the research honors program in BEE. This course is the culmination of the program's honors project requirement. Students enrolled in the BEE Honors program will prepare an honors thesis based on the subject matter of a BEE 4990 project from the previous semester, under the supervision of their BEE 4990 research mentor. A preliminary draft and the final copy will be submitted according to the deadline and formatting requirements of the Honors program.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must be enrolled in BEE 4990 in the previous term and are expected to complete this course during their final term before graduation.

class: BEE 4994
class title: Research for Visiting Students
description: Research in any area of biological and environmental engineering on problems under investigation by the department or of special interest to the student, provided that adequate facilities can be obtained. The student must review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, carry out an approved plan and submit a formal final report.

class: BEE 5270
class title: Water Measurement and Analysis Methods
description: Managing soil and water resources requires monitoring. In this field-based lab course, you learn techniques to quantify water flow in surface and subsurface environments and monitor water quality in lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Soil health considerations, measurement accuracy, and water sampling quality assurance are discussed. The final project involves designing a water quality monitoring plan for a research or industrial site. Graduate students review the literature on the accuracy of the lab methods and present the results in class.

class: BEE 5280
class title: Systems and Synthetic Biology for Sustainable Energy
description: The world today is in a state of enormous transition. In the coming few decades, billions of people will leave poverty and enter the developed world. This unprecedented development will be one of the greatest opportunities ever presented to improve global public health and quality of life, but it will only be realized if it's done right. The challenge of sustainable energy is not just to provide energy without polluting the atmosphere with fossil carbon, but to do so at a global scale at a cost that everyone can afford. Thanks to capabilities ranging from room temperature and pressure catalysis to self-assembly, biology offers first draft solutions to problems in sustainable energy from the safe use of nuclear energy, the capture and storage of solar power, mining and purifying elements critical for sustainable energy technologies like rare earths and even in the construction of advanced materials. In each class we will discuss a set of scientific journal articles and use these discuss the advantages, disadvantages and potential of biology in applications in sustainable energy. In each of the past two years we have used these discussions to write a scientific article with students as co-authors.
outcome: Find, evaluate, and integrate biochemical data on enzymatic reactions from multiple online sources., Combine integrated biochemical data, numerical models, and back of the envelope calculations to assess the feasibility of a chosen sustainability technology., Graduate students will learn how to lead a group writing project that describes mathematical assessment of the mathematical assessment of a chosen sustainability technology., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses or their equivalent: BIOG 1440, BIOMG 3300, MATH 2930, and MATH 2940.

class: BEE 5310
class title: Bio-Fluid Mechanics
description: Properties of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids; hydrostatic and dynamic forces; principles of continuity, conservations of mass, energy and momentum and their applications; laminar and turbulent flows, introduction to Navier Stokes; dimensional analysis and similarity; internal and external bio-fluid examples will be covered e.g. blood circulatory systems and animal locomotion.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910, MATH 1920, MATH 2930, ENGRD 2020 and basic knowledge in complex numbers.

class: BEE 5459
class title: Energy Seminar I
description: Energy Seminars will explore energy-related topics of emerging, contemporary and historical interest. An abbreviated list of subjects explored in the seminars includes: global energy resources, energy generation technologies (present and future), energy storage options, environmental impacts and climate change mitigation, energy policy, and energy delivery economics and systems. Seminar speakers will be distinguished practicing engineers and executives from industry and government as well as faculty members from several departments at Cornell, and other academic institutions. Students from any department in Engineering or the Physical Sciences should find these talks informative.

class: BEE 5500
class title: Heat and Mass Transfer in Biological Engineering
description: Focuses on understanding the principles of heat and mass transfer in the context of biological (biomedical/bioprocessing/bioenvironmental) systems. Emphasizes physical understanding of transport processes with application examples from plant, animal and human biology, the bioenvironment (soil/water/air), and industrial processing of food and biomaterials.  Students in BEE 5500 will develop a more complex computational model (for which analytical solution is difficult) using the software used in one of the homework. The goal of this activity will not be computation itself but using numerical computation to probe deeper into one or more aspects of conduction/diffusion, flow, generation/depletion, or geometry effect in a transport process.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930 and BEE 3310 or equivalent.

class: BEE 5590
class title: Physical Design in Biological Engineering
description: Students will choose a project depending on their interests, and complete the project goal by integrating the knowledge of biology, physics, and engineering. Students will present their proposal and final results, and write a report at the end of the semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112 or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 5730
class title: Watershed Engineering
description: Teaches basic engineering design and analysis as practiced for water control and nonpoint source pollution prevention. Discusses the origins of design approaches, including their theoretical bases and recent or emerging methods and concepts. Most of the course is dedicated to practicing applied design. Assignments are generally representative of real-life engineering problems and involve as much hands-on experience as possible. Some example topics include risk analysis, water conveyance, stormwater management, including green infrastructure and low-impact development.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3310 or BEE 5710 or CEE 6320 or an equivalent hydrology course.

class: BEE 5750
class title: Environmental Systems Analysis
description: Applications of mathematical modeling, simulation, and optimization to environmental systems planning and management. Fate and transport models for contaminants in air, water, and soil. Optimization methods (search techniques, linear programming, integer programming) to evaluate alternatives for power systems, solid waste management and water and air pollution control. Introduction to the impact of uncertainty on solutions and risk assessment through simulation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BEE 2510 or BEE 2600, ENGRD 2700 or equivalent, CEE 3200 or equivalent; or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 5951
class title: Master of Engineering Design Project
description: Comprehensive engineering design projects relating to the candidate's area of specialization. Projects are supervised by a BEE faculty member on an individual basis. A formal project report and oral presentation of the design project are required for completion of the course(s). A minimum of 6 to a maximum of 9 credits of 5951-BEE 5952 is required for the M.Eng. degree.

class: BEE 6310
class title: Environmental Statistics and Learning
description: This course introduces relatively simple but powerful data analysis techniques needed to analyze and model complex datasets frequently encountered in the environmental sciences. The course covers both supervised and unsupervised learning techniques, including linear regression, penalized regression, generalized linear models, local regression, and principal component analysis. These topics are introduced through applications to data from various environmental fields. The course serves as a first course in applied statistics and machine learning for students with only a basic knowledge of probability and statistics, and will provide a review of the mathematical concepts needed to understand the techniques presented. Students will learn by doing, with ample time in class to practice translating theory to application through programming exercises on real environmental datasets.
outcome: Apply supervised and unsupervised learning techniques in modern programming languages., Interpret and communicate statistical analyses of data to support scientific discovery and advance engineering solutions in environmental fields., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700, or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 6400
class title: Advanced Topics in Biomaterials
description: In this class, we will discuss some classical as well as cutting-edge research papers from the biomaterials field on topics including: (1) Polymer Biomaterials; (2) Hydrogel Biomaterials; (3) Inorganic and Composite Biomaterials; and (4) Applications of Biomaterials in Agriculture and Life Sciences. For each topic, the professor will first give introductory lectures, and the students will then give presentations and lead discussions on chosen papers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BEE 3400 or permission of instructor. 

class: BEE 6560
class title: Ecological Mechanics
description: Ecological mechanics explores ecological relations from a mechanics perspective, including fluid, solid, structural mechanics, and heat and mass transport. While other ecological studies incorporate transport of mass, energy, and information, consideration of momentum transport and its consequence in biotic and abiotic relations in organisms is unique to this discipline. We begin the course by introducing the fundamental and advanced concepts in mechanics. Then we will learn how to incorporate these concepts by considering response function (the functional relationship between condition imposed on the system and its response) to understand and predict ecological phenomena such as predator-prey relation and pattern formation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisites: at least one of the following courses or their equivalent: ENGRD 2020, BEE 3310, BEE 3500, and BEE 3400 or equivalent.

class: BEE 6640
class title: Sustainable Bioenergy Production on Marginal Lands of New York and the Northeast
description: Marginal agricultural lands are an oft-cited but largely untapped regional resource base for bioenergy crop production. They constitute the primary available land base for production of second generation bioenergy crops such as perennial grasses and short-rotation woody crops in New York and the Northeast. In this broadly multidisciplinary seminar series, we will explore the challenges of and opportunities for using marginal lands from multiple viewpoints. Our goal is to expose participants to issues involved in the development of low-cost sustainable perennial bioenergy feedstock production based on marginal lands of New York and the Northeast. Having heard and interacted with speakers representing a spectrum of disciplines and perspectives, participants will be better able to understand, evaluate, and/or contribute to the development of bioenergy resources in the region. Participants will develop an appreciation for challenges of bioenergy development and the cross-disciplinary efforts required to address them.

class: BEE 6800
class title: Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Global Change
description: This course investigates the science of atmospheric chemistry as its relation to air pollution and global change. Students examine the chemistry and physics that determines atmospheric composition on local to global scales including the effects of biogeochemistry and atmospheric photochemistry.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090, MATH 1920, and PHYS 1112 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: BEE 6970
class title: Graduate Individual Study in Biological and Environmental Engineering
description: Topics are arranged by the faculty at the beginning of the semester.

class: BEE 7000
class title: Orientation to Graduate Study
description: This course is intended to introduce students to graduate school in Biological and Environmental Engineering. It is intended for first year graduate students although others may find it helpful. It consists of a seminar series and series of classes introducing students to such topics as: how to write a research proposal, how to give a scientific talk, how to get the most out of Cornell resources and time management.
outcome: Students will learn the skills to write a research proposal., Students will employ the necessary skills to succeed in graduate school., 

class: BEE 7600
class title: Nucleic Acid Engineering
description: Nucleic Acid Engineering provides a comprehensive examination of the engineering aspects of nucleic acids beyond their biological context. By integrating molecular biology, bioengineering, and Artificial Intelligence, this course promotes a multidisciplinary and active learning environment. It explores the structure-property-function relationships of nucleic acids, focusing on the development of various nanostructures, devices, and materials derived from nucleic acids. The course also covers molecular toolkits for nucleic acid manipulation, their non-biological functions, and practical applications.
outcome: Describe and identify the structures and functions of nucleic acids, demonstrating a deep understanding of their biological and engineering aspects., Apply engineering principles to biological molecules, specifically connecting these principles to the manipulation and use of nucleic acids., Design and evaluate nucleic acid-based systems, showcasing their ability to conceive and assess innovative engineering solutions., Utilize AI in nucleic acid engineering projects, applying AI tools to enhance the design and analysis of nucleic acid systems., 

class: BEE 7710
class title: Soil and Water Engineering Seminar
description: Study and discussion of research or design procedures related to selected topics including watershed management, erosion control, hydrology, colloid transport, and water quality.

class: BENGL 1121
class title: Elementary Bangla-Bengali I
description: Intended for beginners or students placed by examination. The emphasis is on basic grammar, speaking, and comprehension skills; Bangla script will also be introduced.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: BENGL 2201
class title: Intermediate Bangla-Bengali I
description: Continuing focus on reading, writing, and conversational skills, this course is designed to advance students' oral competence and enhance comprehension skills through reading, conversations, and listening.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BENGL 1122 or examination. 

class: BENGL 3301
class title: Advanced Bangla-Bengali I
description: Continuing instruction in Bangla at the advanced level focusing on conversation, interview, and discussion skills.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BENGL 2202.

class: BENGL 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Bangla-Bengali
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: BIOAP 1100
class title: Domestic Animal Biology
description: This course introduces functional anatomy and physiology of livestock, companion animals and poultry. Building from biomolecules and cellular function to the entire organism, the content aims to integrate understanding of structure-function relationships offering comparisons between mammals and birds. Knowledge of systems physiology through this course will be relevant for pursuing basic and applied fields in animal science, biology and veterinary medicine. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Be able to appreciate the functional complexities of animal biology., Have comprehension of comparative anatomy of livestock and poultry., Have functional understanding of the major animal physiological systems., Be capable of integrating related topics from separate parts of the course and establish a coherent foundational knowledge network., Acquire potential for building on material learned as they advance through biology training., Be aware of the breadth of studies in biology and visualize career interests in animal biology., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOAP 3110
class title: Principles of Animal Physiology
description: General course in animal physiology emphasizing principles of operation, regulation, and integration common to a broad range of living systems from the cellular to the organismal level. Structure/function relationships are stressed along with underlying physico-chemical mechanisms.
outcome: Students should be able to rationalize the operation of major organ systems., Students should understand the organization of multisystem regulatory loops., Students should be able to derive and understand the basic equations defining the physical operating characteristics of organ systems., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOG 1500 and BIOG 1440 or BIOG 1445 or one year of college biology, one year of chemistry and mathematics or equivalent AP credit.

class: BIOAP 3190
class title: Laboratory in Physiology
description: Student-conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments designed to illustrate basic physiological processes, physiological research techniques, instrumentation, experimental design, and interpretation of results. Techniques include anesthesia, surgical procedures, dissection, and real-time computer recording and analysis. Experiments with isolated living tissues or live anesthetized animals examine properties of membranes and epithelia, blood, nerves, skeletal and smooth muscle; cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, and reproductive function and their regulation by the nervous and endocrine systems.
outcome: After this course the student will be able to compute physical phenomena, including electrochemical gradients and mechanical forces in the physiology of live systems., After this course the student will be able to describe the scientific method including experimental design, formulating, and testing hypotheses., After this course the student will be able to work cooperatively in small groups., After this course the student will be able to communicate scientific concepts and experimental results in written and oral form., After this course the student will be able to use statistics to assess the significance of results., After this course the student will be able to research the published scientific findings and interpret them., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOAP 3110.

class: BIOAP 4270
class title: Fundamentals of Endocrinology
description: Physiology and regulation of endocrine secretions. Emphasizes neuroendocrine, reproductive, growth, and metabolic aspects of endocrinology. Examples are selected from many animals, including humans.
outcome: Define the organization of the endocrine system with a focus on mammals., Explain the physiological function of major hormones and interactions among components of the endocrine system to control homeostasis., Describe the cellular source, biosynthesis, chemical nature, storage, factors controlling its secretion, cellular mechanisms of action on target cells, and physiological functions for each major hormone., Predict the consequences of disturbances in components of the endocrine system., Illustrate how basic scientific research as well as clinical studies of endocrine disorders contribute to the advancement of basic knowledge and development of therapeutic strategies for endocrine disorders., Appraise how the acquisition of knowledge about the endocrine system is ongoing and how key advances in technology from multiple fields (physiology, cell biology, biochemistry, and genetics) have promoted advancements in knowledge of the endocrine system., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or BIOG 1440, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOAP 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses. This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIOAP 6100
class title: By Scientific Design: Skill Building for a Career in the Life Sciences
description: This class is designed to prepare first year graduate students for a career in the life sciences. Topics will include grant writing, public presentations, design of experiments, interpretation of data, and literature analysis. Students will also gain practical experience in common techniques used in virology, crystallography, and gene expression.
outcome: Students will be able to formulate a properly controlled scientific study., Students will be able to present scientific data in public forums., Students will be able to critically assess scientific literature., Students will be able to develop a grant proposal., Students will be able to write a scientific abstract., 

class: BIOAP 6270
class title: Fundamentals of Endocrinology
description: Physiology and regulation of endocrine secretions. Emphasizes neuroendocrine, reproductive, growth, and metabolic aspects of endocrinology. Examples are selected from many animals, including humans.
outcome: Define the organization of the endocrine system with a focus on mammals., Explain the physiological function of major hormones and interactions among components of the endocrine system to control homeostasis., Describe the cellular source, biosynthesis, chemical nature, storage, factors controlling its secretion, cellular mechanisms of action on target cells, and physiological functions for each major hormone., Predict the consequences of disturbances in components of the endocrine system., Illustrate how basic scientific research as well as clinical studies of endocrine disorders contribute to the advancement of basic knowledge and development of therapeutic strategies for endocrine disorders., Appraise how the acquisition of knowledge about the endocrine system is ongoing and how key advances in technology from multiple fields (physiology, cell biology, biochemistry, and genetics) have promoted advancements in knowledge of the endocrine system., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOAP 1100 or BIOG 1440, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOAP 7570
class title: Current Concepts in Reproductive Biology
description: For description and learning outcomes, see ANSC 7570.

class: BIOCB 2010
class title: Introduction to Computational Biology
description: This class is designed to inspire students in the life sciences to see the power of Computational Biology in advancing fundamental research. The course will initially be team taught by experts in diverse applications of Computational Biology, with each sharing the excitement of making clear to students how the introduction of computational approaches has been transformative in their field. The course will also teach many fundamental skills in manipulating large data sets, including genome sequences, functional genomic data, images, protein structures, etc.. The course will consist of two lectures each week and one practical exercise session each week. In the practicals, students will learn the use of many of the latest software tools, and will develop some basic programming skills. Students will learn essential problem solving skills in several aspects of genome analysis, and modeling in neurobiology, ecology, physiology and evolution. This will prepare them for future courses in these more focused biological areas covering specific applications of computer programming as well as use of specialized software tools. Students will be able to explore their own specific interests in greater depth on a term project.
outcome: Formulate succinct and focused research questions that make effective use of computation in diverse problems in ecology, genomics, physiology and neuroscience., Organize complex data structures in formats appropriate for analysis., Write short computer programs that organize data into formats that are readable by a wide variety of software., Apply appropriate analysis to data collected in these diverse fields., Identify software resources for tackling novel problems that you have never encountered before., Implement those software tools., Validate results and be critical in assessing their validity and generality., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOCB 4381
class title: Biomedical Data Mining and Modeling
description: A biomedical data science course using Python and available bioinformatics tools and techniques for the analysis of molecular biological data, including biosequences, microarrays, and networks.  This course emphasizes practical skills rather than theory. Topics include advanced Python programming, R and Bioconductor, sequence alignment, MySQL database (DBI), web programming and services (CGI), genomics and proteomics data mining and analysis, machine learning, and methods for inferring and analyzing regulatory, protein-protein interaction, and metabolite networks.
outcome: Demonstrate familiarity with the basics of applied statistical methodology., Demonstrate familiarity with statistical software and a programming language., Demonstrate ability to perform complex data mining of biological datasets using a programming language., Demonstrate ability to effectively communicate the results of a statistical analysis to biologists., Demonstrate familiarity with statistical and computational tools for high throughput genomic data., Demonstrate ability to build stand-alone softwares, web tools, and databases for analyzing biological data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one introductory course in computer programming (any language) and one in statistical methods, or permission of the instructor.

class: BIOCB 4840
class title: Computational Genetics and Genomics
description: Computational methods for analyzing genetic and genomic data. Topics include sequence alignment, hidden Markov Models for discovering sequence features, motif finding using Gibbs sampling, phylogenetic tree reconstruction, inferring haplotypes, and local and global ancestry inference. Prior knowledge of biology is not necessary to complete this course.
outcome: Understand computational algorithms used for the analysis of genetic and genomic data, Formulate computational approaches for solving problems in computational genomics, Understand challenges and limitations in inference methods used in computational genetics and genomics, 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3010 and CS 2110 or equivalents.

class: BIOCB 6010
class title: Introduction to Computational Biology
description: This class is designed to inspire students in the life sciences to see the power of Computational Biology in advancing fundamental research. The course will initially be team taught by experts in diverse applications of Computational Biology, with each sharing the excitement of making clear to students how the introduction of computational approaches has been transformative in their field. The course will also teach many fundamental skills in manipulating large data sets, including genome sequences, functional genomic data, images, protein structures, etc.. The course will consist of two lectures each week and one practical exercise session each week. In the practicals, students will learn the use of many of the latest software tools, and will develop some basic programming skills. Students will learn essential problem solving skills in several aspects of genome analysis, and modeling in neurobiology, ecology, physiology and evolution. This will prepare them for future courses in these more focused biological areas covering specific applications of computer programming as well as use of specialized software tools. Students will be able to explore their own specific interests in greater depth on a term project.
outcome: Formulate succinct and focused research questions that make effective use of computation in diverse problems in ecology, genomics, physiology and neuroscience., Organize complex data structures in formats appropriate for analysis., Write short computer programs that organize data into formats that are readable by a wide variety of software., Apply appropriate analysis to data collected in these diverse fields., Identify software resources for tackling novel problems that you have never encountered before., Implement those software tools., Validate results and be critical in assessing their validity and generality., 

class: BIOCB 6381
class title: Biomedical Data Mining and Modeling
description: A biomedical data science course using Python and available bioinformatics tools and techniques for the analysis of molecular biological data, including biosequences, microarrays, and networks.  This course emphasizes practical skills rather than theory. Topics include advanced Python programming, R and Bioconductor, sequence alignment, MySQL database (DBI), web programming and services (CGI), genomics and proteomics data mining and analysis, machine learning, and methods for inferring and analyzing regulatory, protein-protein interaction, and metabolite networks.
outcome: Demonstrate familiarity with the basics of applied statistical methodology., Demonstrate familiarity with statistical software and a programming language., Demonstrate ability to perform complex data mining of biological datasets using a programming language., Demonstrate ability to effectively communicate the results of a statistical analysis to biologists., Demonstrate familiarity with statistical and computational tools for high throughput genomic data., Demonstrate ability to build stand-alone softwares, web tools, and databases for analyzing biological data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one introductory course in computer programming (any language) and one in statistical methods, or permission of the instructor.

class: BIOCB 6840
class title: Computational Genetics and Genomics
description: Computational methods for analyzing genetic and genomic data. Topics include sequence alignment, hidden Markov Models for discovering sequence features, motif finding using Gibbs sampling, phylogenetic tree reconstruction, inferring haplotypes, and local and global ancestry inference. Prior knowledge of biology is not necessary to complete this course.
outcome: Understand computational algorithms used for the analysis of genetic and genomic data, Formulate computational approaches for solving problems in computational genomics, Understand challenges and limitations in inference methods used in computational genetics and genomics, 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3010 and CS 2110 or equivalents.

class: BIOCB 6890
class title: Current Topics in Population Genomics
description: Graduate seminar on current topics in population genetics. Readings are chosen primarily from current scientific literature. Participation in discussion and presentation of at least one paper required for course credit.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 4810, BIOCB 4810 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOCB 7700
class title: Topics in Statistical Genetics
description: Weekly seminar series on recent advances in statistical genetics. A selection of the latest papers in the field are read and discussed. Methods are stressed, but biological results and their significance are also addressed.
outcome: After completing this course, students should be able to critically read a statistical genetics paper., After completing this course, assess the strengths and weaknesses of a scientific paper., After completing this course, determine whether a paper's conclusions follow from the presented analyses., After completing this course, describe the current state of statistical genetics research., 

class: BIOEE 1150
class title: Techniques of Avian Specimen Preparation
description: This course has two main objectives: 1) to illustrate the diverse uses of natural history collections for research, teaching and conservation, and 2) to introduce students to the fine art of avian specimen preparation. Students will learn multiple specimen preparation techniques (skeletons, spread wings, and round skins) and will be required to prepare 20 round skins to receive course credit. Students will be evaluated on the quality of their specimens and on their participation in an in-class debate surrounding the value of natural history collections.
outcome: Practice avian specimen preparation., Integrate examples of diverse uses of specimens to articulate the value of natural history collections., 

class: BIOEE 1540
class title: Introductory Oceanography
description: This class relies more on intuitive reasoning rather than complicated mathematical formulas to convey basic concepts about how the ocean works. For this reason, the class is very accessible to non-science majors. The class covers standard material about how the ocean works, but also includes current environmental threats facing the ocean such as global warming, ocean acidification, overfishing and coastal pollution. Students will gain a depth of knowledge about the ocean and global warming to enable them to speak and write confidently about contemporary public issues regarding the health of the ocean, global warming and a sustainable future. This course satisfies the Physical and Biological Sciences (PBS) requirement for students in most colleges. For students in A&amp;S and CALS, this course counts as "in-college" credit.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 1560
class title: Introductory Oceanography with Laboratory
description: This class relies more on intuitive reasoning rather than complicated mathematical formulas to convey basic concepts about how the ocean works. For this reason, the class is very accessible to non-science majors. The class covers standard material about how the ocean works, but also includes current environmental threats facing the ocean such as global warming, ocean acidification, overfishing and coastal pollution. Students will gain a depth of knowledge about the ocean and global warming to enable them to speak and write confidently about contemporary public issues regarding the health of the ocean, global warming and a sustainable future. This course satisfies the Physical and Biological Sciences (PBS) requirement for students in most colleges and the Introductory Life Sciences/Biological Sciences requirement for students in CALS. For students in A&amp;S and CALS, this course counts as "in-college" credit. This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 1610
class title: Introductory Biology: Ecology and the Environment
description: This course provides an introduction to ecology, covering interactions between organisms and the environment at scales of populations, communities, and ecosystems. Ecological principles are used to explore the theory and applications of major issues facing humanity in the 21st century, including population dynamics, disease ecology, biodiversity and invasive species, global change, and other topics of environmental sustainability.
outcome: Demonstrate understanding of the ecological principles that affect organismal, population, community, ecosystem, and biospheric processes., Explain the significance of natural history and contrast the diversity of life-history strategies and habitats as it relates to the structure and function of communities and ecosystems., Apply ecological principles to contemporary environmental problems, including climate change and loss of biodiversity., Use experimental and synthetic approaches to analyze and identify patterns and processes at various scales of ecological organization., Combine tools and basic concepts to identify the causes and consequences of complex ecological relationships., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 1640
class title: FWS: Topics in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
description: The First-Year Writing Seminar provides the opportunity to write extensively about issues related to ecology and evolutionary biology. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: BIOEE 1780
class title: An Introduction to Evolutionary Biology and Diversity
description: Considers explanations for pattern of diversity and the apparent good fit of organisms to the environment. Topics include the diversity of life, the genetics and developmental basis of evolutionary change, processes at the population level, evolution by natural selection, modes of speciation, long-term trends in evolution, origin of humans.
outcome: Understand the underlying causal principles of evolutionary diversification., Apply these principles to understand historical and contemporary evolutionary scenarios., Identify ~100 core taxa in the tree of life, their characteristics, and understand the relationships among them., Use basic conceptual and analytical tools to describe complex relationships within the tree of life., Become familiar with a number of experimental and synthetic approaches to analyzing and discovering evolutionary processes (microevolution) and establishing evolutionary patterns (macroevolution)., Write and discuss knowledgeably about the dimensions of evolutionary issues that require decisions in our society., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 1781
class title: Introduction to Evolution and Diversity
description: Considers explanations for pattern of diversity and the apparent good fit of organisms to the environment. Topics include the diversity of life, the genetics and developmental basis of evolutionary change, processes at the population level, evolution by natural selection, modes of speciation, long-term trends in evolution, origin of humans.
outcome: Understand the underlying causal principles of evolutionary diversification., Apply these principles to understand historical and contemporary evolutionary scenarios., Identify ~100 core taxa in the tree of life, their characteristics, and understand the relationships among them., Use basic conceptual and analytical tools to describe complex relationships within the tree of life., Become familiar with a number of experimental and synthetic approaches to analyzing and discovering evolutionary processes (microevolution) and establishing evolutionary patterns (macroevolution)., Write and discuss knowledgeably about the dimensions of evolutionary issues that require decisions in our society., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 3610
class title: Advanced Ecology
description: This course provides an in depth survey of ecology emphasizing conceptual foundations and the integration of experimental and quantitative approaches, including population and community ecology, ecosystem biology, and ecological modeling. Current and classical ecological research is used to introduce major concepts and methods, derive major ecological principles, and critically discuss their applicability on multiple organizational levels, on multiple scales, and in a variety of ecosystems. Weekly discussion/lab sections focus on measurement techniques and computation (modeling, simulation and data analysis using the R language).
outcome: Read, synthesize, and critically discuss contemporary published research in ecology. Analyze ecological systems in terms of proximate and ultimate causation, and be able to work with multi-level systems interactions., Use basic conceptual and analytical tools for describing and quantifying ecological relationships., Understand and use fundamental analytical methods to describe structure and dynamics of populations and communities. Make predictions about population and community dynamics based on knowledge about biotic and abiotic factors influencing species interactions. Integrate knowledge about species interactions to explain higher level ecosystem processes., Evaluate differences across ecosystems in terms of differences in rates of metabolism and the relative open-ness of ecosystem cycles., Critically evaluate data from whole-ecosystem experiments and cross-ecosystem studies., Analyze some of the complex interactions between global change and ecological structure and function., "Read" a model, interpreting its equations as statements about underlying processes and assumptions about system structure and function., Modify existing models for applications to related systems or alternative scenarios., Use the R scripting language as an environment for implementing ecological models and studying their behavior., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SMR-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of calculus and BIOEE 1610 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOEE 3611
class title: Field Ecology
description: Exercises designed to give students direct experience with field research to address ecological hypotheses, with emphasis on developing observational skills and basic methods in population and community ecology. Topics include methods in plant succession, niche relationships, influence of herbivores and competitors on plant communities, aquatic food web analysis, use of scientific collections, and presenting research results in written and oral form. We will visit a diversity of habitats and natural areas in Central New York.  Students will conduct an independent research project and present their findings.
outcome: Identify habitat types and characterize habitats based on key structural features and organisms., Integrate textbook knowledge with field observations to formulate and discuss research questions in ecology  based on personal observation and scientific theory., Creatively identify research questions and derive appropriate scientific hypotheses., Design and plan experiments and surveys based on scientific hypotheses., Conduct field experiments/surveys and analyze and discuss the results., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOEE 1610.

class: BIOEE 3730
class title: Biodiversity and Biology of the Marine Invertebrates
description: Introduction to the biology, natural history, and evolution of the major invertebrate phyla, concentrating on marine representatives. In addition to the evolution of form and function, lectures cover aspects of ecology, behavior, physiology, chemical ecology, and current research. The discussion section will focus on current research papers with marine invertebrates.
outcome: Learn the major phyla of marine invertebrates through lectures, videos, exposure to the Blaschka glass collection and a field trip., Understand phylo genetic relationships among the major phyla and within selected major phyla., Develop an appreciation for some major avenues of research with marine invertebrates and develop critical reading skills, by reading and discussing original research., Develop critical research and thinking skills and oral presentation skills through a project., Gain experience in giving a formal presentation., Learn to work as a group through take home essays and paper discussion sessions., Gain experience in organismal biology., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOEE 1780 or BIOEE 1781, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOEE 4550
class title: Insect Ecology
description: You will learn to think like an ecologist by studying the fundamental principles of insect ecology and the types of questions ecologists ask, seeing how ecology can be used to understand and solve environmental problems, and putting this knowledge into action during group activities in the lab and field.
outcome: 1.1 Students will be able to explain the fundamental principles of population and community ecology.
1.2 Students will be to identify what interactions are important for insects.
1.3 Students will learn natural history of local insects., 2.1 Students will be able to interpret data presented in graphs.
2.2 Students will be able to pose their own questions and design and execute experiments to answer these questions. 
2.3 Students will be able to read and interpret the scientific literature.
2.4 Students will be able to use basic statistical methods to interpret their data., 3.1 Students will participate actively in debate with peers using information they research in the primary literature, 4.1 Students will write full reports based on the field and laboratory projects they conduct.
4.2 Students will have opportunities to summarize and evaluate the important factors in insect ecology, 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology recommended or permission of instructor.

class: BIOEE 4570
class title: Limnology: Ecology of Lakes, Lectures
description: Limnology is the study of inland freshwaters, which includes lakes, ponds, reservoirs, rivers, streams, and wetlands. This course focuses on lakes and ponds, and examines their physical, chemical, and biological properties. A lake's physical (e.g., size, light, temperature, mixing) and chemical (elements and compounds) structure directly affects aquatic organisms in terms of species abundance, diversity, and interactions. Organisms in turn influence their physical and chemical environment. This class will introduce students to fundamental concepts in limnology, which we will build upon to examine real-world challenges facing freshwater ecosystems (e.g., eutrophication, invasive species, climate change).
outcome: Explain fundamental concepts that govern lakes and ponds, including physical, chemical, and biological properties., Describe interactions between aquatic organisms and their physical and chemical environments, which regulate abundance and community structure of organisms., Compare the multiple approaches used to examine lake dynamics (e.g., experiments, observational studies, models)., Assess the human impacts to lake organisms and ecosystems, identify the ecological processes underlying those effects, and explain possible mitigation management actions., Critically read, evaluate, and discuss scientific literature., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOEE 1610 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOEE 4571
class title: Limnology: Ecology of Lakes, Laboratory
description: Laboratories and field trips devoted to studies of the biological, chemical, and physical properties of lakes and other freshwater environments. Exercises focus on understanding the freshwater environment, on experimentation, and on understanding ecological processes within lakes.
outcome: Use routine limnological methods to sample the physical, chemical, and biological parameters of lakes and ponds., Use microscopy to examine aquatic phytoplankton, zooplankton, and macroinvertebrates, with familiarity on identification and taxonomic counts., Perform basic statistical analyses and data visualization using R., Effectively communicate research findings through scientific writing and an oral presentation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOEE 4570.

class: BIOEE 4760
class title: Ichthyology: Biology of Fishes, Lectures
description: Introduction to the systematic study of fossil and living fishes: their anatomy, physiology and functional morphology, behavior, ecology, diversity, evolution, classification, and identification. Emphasizes marine fishes from different habitats (temperate, tropical coral reef, intertidal, and deep sea), local freshwater species, and interesting freshwater fishes from around the world, especially South America, Africa and Australia.
outcome: Understand the organismal biology of fishes, including their structure, physiology, functional morphology, and behavior., Use knowledge of fishes in any basic research or applied context., Understand the evolutionary history of fishes and phylogenetic interpretation based on morphological and molecular study., Interpret phylogenies and use tree thinking in the service of any kind of biological research field., Become familiar with the taxonomy and phenotypic diversity of the world's fishes as well as human-induced challenges to that diversity., Through study of the local fish fauna, students will be able to apply the tools of fish identification to learn a new fauna in any region of the world., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOEE 4761
class title: Ichthyology: Biology of Fishes, Laboratory
description: Laboratory course covering topics presented in BIOEE 4760. Two field trips, including one full-day weekend trip required. Live animals are studied in the field and are sometimes used in the laboratory for nondestructive demonstrations or experiments. The systematics and dissection laboratories use preserved specimens.
outcome: Understand the organismal biology of fishes, including their structure, physiology, functional morphology, and behavior., Use knowledge of fishes in any basic research or applied context., Understand the evolutionary history of fishes and phylogenetic interpretation based on morphological and molecular study., Interpret phylogenies and use tree thinking in the service of any kind of biological research field., Become familiar with the taxonomy and phenotypic diversity of the world's fishes as well as human-induced challenges to that diversity., Through study of the local fish fauna, students will be able to apply the tools of fish identification to learn a new fauna in any region of the world., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOEE 4760.

class: BIOEE 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses. This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIOEE 6900
class title: Seminar in Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases
description: Graduate-level discussion of the ecology, epidemiology, genetics, and evolution of infectious disease in animal and plant systems. Weekly discussion of research papers published in the primary scientific literature. Participation in discussion and presentation of at least one paper required for course credit.
outcome: Students will become conversant in general topics in the ecology and evolution of infection and disease across a variety of plant and animal systems—approaches will be both empirical and theoretical., Students will learn how to read and evaluate the peer-reviewed scientific literature., Students will gain experience giving oral presentations as a means for sharing their evaluations of the scientific literature., 

class: BIOEE 7600
class title: Special Topics in Evolution and Ecology
description: Lectures and intensive study of special topics in the field of Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology. Content varies each semester.

class: BIOEE 7640
class title: Plant-Insect Interactions Seminar
description: Group intensive study of current research in plant-insect interactions. Topics vary from semester to semester but include chemical defense, coevolution, insect community structure, population regulation, biocontrol, tritrophic interactions, and mutualism.
outcome: Read, synthesize, and discuss findings from original scientific research in the ecology and evolution of plants interacting with their environment., 

class: BIOEE 7670
class title: Current Topics in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
description: Critical evaluation and discussion of theory and research in ecology and evolutionary biology. Lectures by faculty and student-led discussions of topics in areas of current importance.
outcome: Become familiar with major research questions in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology., Discuss these questions with peers., Develop a research proposal, including scientific justification, background, hypotheses, methods, and broader impacts., Provide commentary and suggestions on proposals written by their peers., Create personal reference list of papers and bibliographies., Enhance understanding of diversity, equity, and inclusion in higher education and STEM fields., Become familiar with grant writing, choosing a thesis topic, navigating graduate school and advisors, giving talks, mental health resources and scientific resources on campus., 

class: BIOEE 7800
class title: Graduate Seminar in Ornithology
description: Group intensive study of current research in ornithology built around a research seminar series covering a wide variety of projects and topics in ornithology and related disciplines, including avian ecology, evolution, conservation, behavior, and physiology. Each weekly seminar is followed by informal discussion and networking that builds connections among the large community of Cornell students and scholars with an interest in avian biology. All students with an interest in this subject area are welcome and deep knowledge of ornithology is not expected or required. Instructor permission is not required for enrollment.
outcome: Describe research projects presented during the semester's seminars., Understand the concepts presented in seminars., See the implications of opportunities and research approaches and findings for developing the student's own interests in ornithology., Greater linkages among students and Cornell researchers, providing students with new contacts and research opportunities., 

class: BIOEE 9990
class title: Ph.D. Dissertation Research
description: Dissertation research conducted by a Ph.D. student in the field of ecology and evolutionary biology with advice and consultation of a major professor who is a member of the field.

class: BIOG 1044
class title: Academic Support for BIOG 1440: Physiology
description: This course reviews material presented in BIOG 1440 and provides problem-solving strategies and additional practice with material. BIOG 1044 support is recommended for students who want to maximize their understanding of Comparative Physiology and enhance their learning skills. BIOG 1044 is not a substitute for BIOG 1440.
outcome: Ability to solve problems based on BIOG 1440 material., Formulate hypotheses using concepts from BIOG 1440., Demonstrate their learning on BIOG 1440 exams., Design effective study and time management plans., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BIOG 1440.

class: BIOG 1111
class title: Paths to Success in the Biological Sciences Major
description: This course is for first-year students entering or intending to enter the Biological Sciences major in either the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) or College of Arts &amp; Sciences. This course will empower you to find your purpose as part of a diverse and inclusive global community of learners and focuses on facilitating your transition to college life, developing your academic identity, and making your time at Cornell a meaningful experience. You will develop a learning community, identify your support network, and explore what Cornell offers to you as a first-year student. We will work with you to develop skills for balancing academic success with extracurricular and interpersonal activities during your time in the major.
outcome: Students will be able to describe what you can learn and experience in your major and develop potential paths associated with your major., Students will be able to identify your academic goals and the opportunities, resources and services that are available to help you meet these goals., Students will be able to identify and acknowledge your social identity, cultural rules, and biases, along with the inherent value of being open to diverse perspectives., Students will be able to communicate effectively and professionally with members of the Cornell community., Students will be able to develop and maintain a learning community and a support network., Students will be able to engage in self-reflection about how you think and learn, how you interact with others, how to navigate your academic experience ethically and with integrity, and how you respond to new information., 

class: BIOG 1140
class title: Foundations of Biology
description: The course offers an introduction to biology at the cell and molecular levels, including cell function, energetics, Mendelian genetics, molecular genetics, DNA technology and evolution. The emphasis is on key concepts that underlie living systems, rather than a myriad of unrelated facts. This is a lecture course with an integrated discussion section in which active learning and student engagement activities further emphasize the key concepts with compelling examples from living systems. Designed to meet the biology requirements of science students who need to fulfill the distribution requirement in CALS and Human Ecology. It does not meet the requirement for the premedical or prevet program nor the major in biological science. It, along with courses in the core major program, may be used to fulfill the Arts and Sciences distribution requirement. There is no laboratory for this course. Students that require a biology laboratory experience as part of their requirements should enroll in BIOG 1500 .This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOG 1250
class title: Biology Seminar
description: A first-year seminar that provides an opportunity for students to participate in a small group, interactive course with a biologist. Students will develop critical thinking skills by exploring topics in the biological sciences (review at least one scientific paper). Multiple topics and sections will be offered each semester.

class: BIOG 1440
class title: Introductory Biology: Comparative Physiology
description: An introductory physiology course intended for first-year and sophomore biological sciences majors and other students majoring in life sciences. The course integrates physiology from the cell to the organism with comparisons among animals, plants and microbes. Emphasis is on understanding of basic physiological concepts, stressing structure-function relationships and underlying physio-chemical mechanisms.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the principles of how organisms work at the molecular, cellular, and systems levels, how these principles are based on the rules of physics and chemistry, and how the processes of physiology at one level emerge from processes at the lower levels., Students will be able to think like a physiologist. This involves understanding how the properties of cells determine function at all higher levels of biological organization including how cellular membranes create selective barriers and how substances cross these barriers, how biological processes are regulated, and how cells and organisms exchange energy and matter with the environment, respond to their environment (including stimulus transduction, intercellular communication, and information processing), and generate mechanical forces and movement., Students will be able to appreciate the similarities and differences between the physiologies of humans and other organisms, and so to appreciate how the study of comparative physiology is relevant to understanding your own life, and to understanding how evolution explains both the unity and diversity of life., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOG 1445
class title: Introduction to Comparative Anatomy and Physiology, Individualized Instruction
description: The course focuses on the understanding of how different biological organisms (animals, plants, microbes) perform common physiological functions.
outcome: Students will be able to identify and understand the underlying principles shared by physiological systems, at the molecular, cellular, and systems levels and relate these principles to the physical and thermodynamic laws that influence organismal design., Students will be able to recognize the diversity of physiological systems and understand the interactions of these systems with anatomical structure., Students will be able to utilize critical thinking and analytical skills when addressing physiological issues to understand organisms' adaptations to their environments., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOG 1500
class title: Investigative Biology Laboratory
description: Designed for biological sciences majors to provide lab experience with emphasis on processes of scientific investigations and to promote communication, literacy and collaboration in science. Students gain expertise in methods including instrumentation used by biologists to construct new knowledge. Lab topics include genetics, evolution, ecology, biochemistry, and molecular biology.
outcome: To expose students to realistic scientific questions and encourage critical thinking, teach how to design hypothesis-based experiments, choose appropriate statistical test(s), analyze data, and interpret results., To fill students' scientific "tool box" by demonstrating mastery of modern lab techniques and scientific methods that can later be applied across varied biological systems and scales., To teach students how to find relevant scientific information using appropriate library tools, and to communicate effectively using both written and oral formats., To teach students how to think through a scientific process with their research group while acquiring conceptual knowledge and understanding the benefits and challenges of collaborative work., To teach how to use discovery science to explore patterns in nature, and understand the importance of accuracy and precision., To provide students with the opportunity to learn and apply fundamental biological information in the context of the course modules., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOG 2000
class title: Special Studies in Biology
description: Registration device for students who want to take only a portion of a regular biological sciences course-for example, only the lectures or only the laboratory in a course that includes both. Only students who have already had training equivalent to the portion of the regular course that is to be omitted may register in this manner. This course may not be used to fulfill college distribution requirements except by permission from the Office of Undergraduate Biology.

class: BIOG 2200
class title: Biology Scholars Program Sophomore Seminar
description: The first half of the semester will focus on interpreting and evaluating scientific literature. Students will do group presentations on a primary research or review paper. The second half will cover careers in science, personal and professional development, on-campus research, and summer opportunities.
outcome: Students will be able to build and practice presentation skills., Students will be able to read, interpret, evaluate, and present scientific literature to peers and faculty., Students will be able to work effectively with small peer group., Students will be able to assess personal strengths and how they can best be used to meet goals., Students will be able to learn how to write an effective personal statement., 

class: BIOG 2400
class title: Developing a Reflective Study Group Leader Practice
description: Students will complete readings and view online media on teaching and learning, create and critique lesson plans, and participate in regular discussions with other SGLs. Each week SGLs will reflect on their group meetings through both writing and discussion, and review challenges and successes during trainings. The SGL position is a year-long commitment; members will enroll in BioG 2401 in the spring. Topics covered in BioG 2400 and 2401 include leading effective groups, cognitive taxonomy, motivation techniques, facilitating discussion, learning styles, growth mindset, metacognition, resilience, community building, and supporting students from diverse backgrounds.
outcome: Students will be able to foster a safe and welcoming environment centered on collaborative learning., Students will be able to develop collaborative learning exercises and effective group facilitation/group discussion strategies in support of courses required by the Biological Sciences major., Students will be able to construct effective lesson plans that challenge students at or just above their level of understanding in the subject., Students will be able to use teaching and learning theories along with feedback from group members to plan for and conduct study group., Students will be able to understand and respond to needs of diverse learners, who are sometimes from disadvantaged/marginalized backgrounds., Students will be able to reflect on development as a Study Group Leader and identify areas needing improvement., 

class: BIOG 2990
class title: Introduction to Research Methods in Biology
description: Intended for students who are new to undergraduate research. Students enrolled in BIOG 2990 may be reading scientific literature, learning research techniques, or assisting with ongoing research. The faculty supervisor determines the work goals and the form of the final report. Any Cornell faculty member whose research field is biological in nature may serve as a supervisor for this course. Non-Cornell supervisors are not acceptable.

class: BIOG 3100
class title: Preparing HHMI-CURT Scholars for Research
description: This course is for students in the HHMI-Cornell Research Transfer (CURT) program, and will introduce HHMI-CURT Scholars to faculty research, include scholar presentations, and serve as a forum for HHMI-CURT Scholars to discuss potential difficulties or success in labs. 
outcome: Students will be able to explain faculty research in life science., Students will be able to orally communicate concepts in life science., Students will be able to critically evaluate primary life science research literature and primary laboratory findings., 

class: BIOG 4970
class title: Independent Study in Biology
description: This course is designed for a student to study a problem or topic not covered in a regular course or undertake tutorial study of an independent nature in an area of interest in Biology, under the supervision of a faculty member in any biology department that does not have its own Independent Study course, i.e., Animal Physiology, Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology, Microbiology, Molecular Biology &amp; Genetics, Neurobiology &amp; Behavior. The student's academic advisor must approve the course for it to be used to satisfy a Biological Sciences concentration requirement. Students must register using the CALS Special Studies form available online.

class: BIOG 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses. This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIOG 4990
class title: Independent Undergraduate Research in Biology
description: For students with previous undergraduate experience conducting biological research at Cornell. Students enrolled for this credit should be doing independent work on their own project. Any Cornell faculty member whose research field is biological in nature may serve as supervisor for this course. Non-Cornell supervisors are not acceptable.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester BIOG 2990 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: BIOG 4997
class title: Biological Sciences Practical Training
description: This independent study course offers students in the Biological Sciences major an opportunity to reflect on professional and personal growth, challenges, and opportunities resulting from a recent internship or training experience. International students should contact the Office of Global Learning to determine if they need work authorization. Typically, these internships/experiences take place in the summer and students, in the semester they return to campus, write a paper describing their work experience and how it connects to their personal educational and career goals as well as the learning objectives of the Biological Sciences major. The value of the course is in the deep reflection on expectations, successes, challenges and skills and knowledge gained during the internship.
outcome: Describe the ways in which the internship experience met, exceeded, or did not meet the students' expectations at the outset. This includes the experience alignment with the employer's description as well as the students personal and professional set of values and ethics., Identify knowledge, skills, or other experiences (in the conceptual, technical and social realm) that would be beneficial going forward in preparation for successful future in a chosen career based on the internship experience., Identify how the experiences supplements, builds-upon, or extends the skill the student is developing as a biological sciences major., Weigh the benefits and the challenges of working in a new environment., Synthesize the component reflections on strengths, challenges, expectations, and personal values into an exploration of potential career paths going forward., 

class: BIOG 6500
class title: Pedagogy, Active Learning, and Education Research Training in the Biology
description: This course is designed for the graduate student instructors who are interested in teaching in the biological sciences. This course provides transferable pedagogical skills, focusing on discipline-based education research, active learning, undergraduate TA mentoring, metacognition and best teaching practices in biology courses. The course is taught by the Investigative Biology Teaching Laboratories director and educational postdoctoral fellows. Graduate students receive the reading materials (books and journal articles) in advance, and are expected to lead discussions about their chosen topics. Each session will include guided reflections to help instructors connect their own teaching experiences to that week's topic in education research. By the end of the semester students will become familiar with education research, receive training in modern pedagogical methods and will be able to practice their newly gained skills in the courses they teach. They will walk away with a peer-reviewed statement of teaching philosophy that can be used in their teaching portfolios. This course is intended to provide formal training in pedagogy and education research to the graduate student instructors in biology courses, and help them develop a professional teaching portfolio in addition to their teaching experience.
outcome: Students will be able to demonstrate modern pedagogical methods in their own laboratory sections., Students will be able to assess active learning strategies used in biology education., Students will be able to develop pedagogical strategies based on discipline-based education research., Students will be able to implement active learning and other effective teaching methods in science for biology laboratories., Students will be able to present a comprehensive statement of teaching philosophy based on education research, modern pedagogical methods and their own teaching experience., 

class: BIOMG 1035
class title: Academic Support for BIOMG 1350: Cell and Developmental Biology
description: This course reviews material presented in BIOMG 1350 and provides problem-solving strategies and additional practice with material. BIOMG 1035 support is recommended for students who want to maximize their understanding of Cell and Developmental Biology and enhance their learning skills. BIOMG 1035 is not a substitute for BIOMG 1350.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BIOMG 1350.

class: BIOMG 1350
class title: Introductory Biology: Cell and Developmental Biology
description: The course introduces molecular mechanisms that underlie the organization, division, and growth of individual cells; how they organize during embryonic development to form functional tissues and organs in multicellular organisms; and how their misbehavior contributes to disease. Students seeking additional help with the material taught in BIOMG 1350 should consider the active learning supplemental class BIOMG 1035 (see course catalog for details). The learning outcomes below indicate the topics and skills that students should master upon completion of the course.
outcome: The internal organization of the cell, cellular organelles, and their main functions., The four major classes of macromolecules in cells., The diversity of structures that allow proteins to execute nearly all of a cell's myriad functions., The molecular basis of various cellular processes such as secretory pathway and the cell cycle., The signaling pathways used by cells to communicate with each other and with their environment., Individual cell behaviors that act to promote form and function of embryonic tissue and organs., How to apply concepts learned in class to interpret hypothetical experimental observations., How to acquire scientific information from various databases and from the primary literature., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOMG 2800
class title: Lectures in Genetics and Genomics
description: General introduction to the fundamental principles of genetics in eukaryotes and bacteria. Topics include: gene transmission, linkage, recombination, structure, mutations, and manipulation, as well as analysis of genomes in individuals and populations.
outcome: Describe basic principles of inheritance, gene expression, and genomic structure in the context of biological evolution., Think analytically and creatively about the applications of basic principles of inheritance and gene expression to interpretations of naturally occurring and experimental biological phenomena., Know how genetics provides an experimental approach that can be used to investigate almost any aspect of biology., Develop an appreciation that genetics is important to future progress in medical sciences., Develop problem solving skills employing logical thought., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one college-level introductory biology course or equivalent, or permission of the instructor.

class: BIOMG 2801
class title: Laboratory in Genetics and Genomics
description: General introduction to laboratory experimental genetics. Topics include gene transmission, linkage, recombination, gene structure, mutations, and manipulation. 
outcome: Think analytically and creatively about the applications of basic principles of inheritance and molecular genetics to interpretations of naturally occurring and experimental biological phenomena., Gain basic laboratory skills in genetics, molecular biology, and data recording that are generally useful in biological and medical research., Become familiar with basic tools of bioinformatics, including genome databases, genome browsers, and programs facilitating the comparison of DNA and protein sequences., Develop an understanding of how the scientific method works and how analysis of raw experimental and control data is the foundation for scientific conclusions., Develop an understanding of real-world biological constraints on the design and execution of experiments involving live organisms., Synthesize an integrated view of inheritance extending from nucleotide sequences through gene expression and chromosome mechanics., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800, if you have not taken BIOMG 1350 or biochemistry (BIOMG 3300, BIOMG 3320, or BIOMG 3350); BIOMG 2800 is a corequisite if BIOMG 1350 has been taken.

class: BIOMG 3300
class title: Principles of Biochemistry, Individualized Instruction
description: Thirteen units that cover protein structure and function, enzymes, basic metabolic pathways, DNA, RNA, protein synthesis, and an introduction to recombinant DNA techniques. No formal lectures, auto-tutorial format.
outcome: After taking BIOMG 3300, students should be able to:  
-Discuss and describe in writing: The structure and function of biologically important macromolecules, the general catalytic and regulatory mechanisms of enzymes, the energetics, organization, and regulation of metabolic pathways, the mechanisms underlying DNA replication, DNA repair, transcription and its regulation, and translation (protein synthesis), the techniques used to study proteins, membranes, and nucleic acids., Think analytically and use quantitative reasoning to solve biochemical problems., Formulate conclusions based on the analysis of biochemical experimental results., Students should recognize that the advancement of knowledge is facilitated by collaboration between individuals from a wide variety of backgrounds and beliefs., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one majors-level biology course and one year general chemistry and any of the following organic chemistry courses: CHEM 1570, or CHEM 3530, or CHEM 3570, or CHEM 3590, or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 3310
class title: Principles of Biochemistry: Proteins and Metabolism
description: The chemical reactions important to biology, and the enzymes that catalyze these reactions, are discussed in an integrated format. Topics include: protein folding, enzyme catalysis, bioenergetics, and key reactions of synthesis and catabolism.
outcome: In this lecture-based course, students start from fundamental principles of chemistry, physics, and mathematics as the framework for understanding biology. Homework problems every week, together with a quiz or else major exam every week, enable students to assimilate the fundamental principles while the complexity of biochemistry is being mastered systematically.  Students will be able to explain how each component of biochemistry is connected to others., Most of the information that students are asked to master is contained in approximately 800 pages of text reading assignments, along with the course-specific 320 page Lecture Guide. In addition, students are assigned to go online to the Protein Data Bank and examine primary scientific information about protein and carbohydrate structure. Students will be able to choose any protein or small molecule whose structure has been determined, and display that molecule on a computer screen., Students learn to use simple but quantitative principles to understand important biological phenomena. We emphasize the interconnections of vast amounts of information, particularly in metabolism, that are the basis for how cells stay alive. Students will be able to explain principles such as protein folding, the chemiosmotic model, and enzyme kinetics using basic principles of physical chemistry., Students are required to communicate their understanding of lecture material every week on a quiz or more midterm and final exams. Students learn to grasp visual representations of macromolecules, especially proteins, by means of a weekly molecular graphics assignment using the freeware PyMOL. By the end of the semester, students will be able to manipulate and explain protein and carbohydrate images by use of PyMOL, and explain these in terms of biochemical principles., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one majors-level biology course and one year general chemistry and any of the following organic chemistry courses: CHEM 1570 or CHEM 3530 or CHEM 3570 or CHEM 3590 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 3340
class title: Computer Graphics and Molecular Biology
description: Visualization of complex biomolecules using computer graphics techniques. Group presentations on current topics in molecular biology.
outcome: Use computer graphics techniques to study protein structure., Discuss and/or describe in writing the function of several proteins in terms of their structures., Read and critically evaluate some of the primary scientific literature in structural biology., Research, organize, and present an advanced topic in biochemistry., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3350, BIOMG 3310, BIOMG 3320 (BIOMG 3320 may be taken concurrently). Corequisite: BIOMG 3300.

class: BIOMG 3850
class title: Developmental Biology
description: This course is primarily concerned with the causal basis of developmental events, mainly focusing on animal development. We will be learning how a fertilized egg becomes an animal. Topics covered will include embryonic organization, role of genes in development, inductive interactions, morphogenesis and pattern formation. Subject matter will include not only what we know about development but also how we learned it.
outcome: Explain the pros and cons of the major animal model systems used in development biology, such as C. elegans, Drosophila, amphibians, fish, mouse, and human cells., Understand the nature of experimental research as the basis for our current understanding in developmental biology., Interpret results of developmental biology experiments and draw conclusions from them., Describe general developmental mechanisms, including terms and concepts of developmental biology (e.g., induction, autonomous specification, morphogens, differential adhesion, etc.), Discuss biological information that underlies ethical issues such as stem cells and human cloning., Read critically primary literature on a chosen topic through literature enrichment exercises., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 4000
class title: Genomics
description: Introduction to principles underlying the organization of genomes and the methods of studying them, emphasizing genome-wide approaches to research. Covers the application of genomics methodologies for addressing issues including gene regulation, evolution, complex systems, genetics, and gene: phenotype relationships. Landmark and timely genomics papers and other research developments will be discussed. Basic bioinformatics tools will be incorporated.
outcome: To learn modern Genomics technologies and how they are applied in scientific research., To develop the ability to propose experiments designed to answer biological questions, with an emphasis on Genomics approaches., To think independently and creatively in solving problems with the tools of Genomics., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two majors-level biology courses and BIOMG 2800, or BIOMG 3300, BIOMG 3350, or BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 4311
class title: Proteins: Structure, Function and Evolution
description: Students in this course will discover the complex behavior of proteins and how they impact biology. The course is divided into three different sections. The first section is a classic protein structure-function section incorporating advanced enzyme kinetics. The second section of this course will review how proteins evolve and how this can be practically analyzed. After the course's final section, students will be able to integrate the theory behind purifying and analyzing proteins with modern spectroscopy and microscopy techniques.
outcome: Construct a hierarchy detailing the levels of protein structure and the general theory of protein folding., Perform a quantitative and qualitative assessment of enzyme function, including evaluating equations defining enzyme reaction mechanisms and constructing models defining the specific steps in enzymatic reactions., Develop methodologies to purify and characterize proteins and enzymes that demonstrate their ability to integrate theory and practical application for single particle analysis., Describe methods to acquire and synthesize information related to protein sequence and structure evolution., Model the relationship between homologous proteins across kingdoms of life and generate phylogenetic trees., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300, or BIOMG 3350, or BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320 and CHEM 3570 and CHEM 3580. Recommended prerequisite: physical chemistry course.

class: BIOMG 4380
class title: RNA in Biology and Medicine
description: It is hypothesized that RNA may have been the earliest life form on earth. Nowadays RNA plays three vital roles in biology. It serves as an information carrier to guide biological processes; it adopts sophisticated 3D structures to promote recognition and catalysis; and it promotes cellular compartmentalization. Each of these properties has been exploited for therapeutics and medicine. This course explores the idea of a prehistorical "RNA World", dives deep into interesting topics in the RNA biology, and explains their connection to modern medicine. Representative topics include the mechanisms of CRISPR-Cas and RNA interference and their
wide-spread applications in research and medicine, ribosome as an antibiotic target, perturbing splicing to cure genetic diseases, connection between telomerase and cancer/aging, etc. Classical experiments as well as up-to-date research are covered in this class. A portion of each class is devoted to student presentations and discussion. After completing this class, students should:
outcome: Understand the chemical structure of RNA., Understand the structure motifs in RNA., Have a good understanding of the experimental and computational methods in RNA biology research., Understand the catalytic strategies in ribozymes., Understand the ligand recognition mechanism in riboswitches., Understand the role of RNA in important RNA-protein complexes., Understand the important topics in translation., Understand the RNA splicing/processing/editing process., Understand the mechanism of RNA interference in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300, or BIOMG 3350 or BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 4400
class title: Laboratory in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
description: Students in this course will carry out experiments in protein biochemistry and molecular biology in an engaging laboratory environment. The protein biochemistry projects include protein purification (salt fractionation, ion exchange chromatography, affinity chromatography, size exclusion chromatography, and immunoprecipitation), protein analysis (SDS PAGE, BN PAGE, immunoblotting, and activity assays), and determination of enzyme kinetic parameters (Vmax, KM, and kcat). The molecular biology projects include CRISPR-mediated genome editing, nucleic acid purifications (plasmid DNA and RNA), gene expression analysis (RT-PCR and splicing), agarose gel electrophoresis, restriction endonuclease digestion, PCR, DNA cloning, transformation, and DNA sequence analysis. The course is organized around interesting projects that illustrate how different techniques are uniquely suited to answer a scientific question.
outcome: Plan, carry out, and interpret the results of laboratory experiments., Use modern laboratory techniques to purify and study proteins and to purify and work with nucleic acids., Understand the theoretical basis of the laboratory techniques., Use on-line databases to assist in data analysis., Create and use a laboratory notebook., Effectively communicate results of laboratory work, in both oral and written form., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300 or BIOMG 3350 or BIOMG 3310-BIOMG 3320 (at least one of BIOMG 3310-BIOMG 3320 completed, but one may be taken concurrently).

class: BIOMG 4870
class title: Human Genomics
description: Applies fundamental concepts of transmission, population, and molecular genetics to the problem of determining the degree to which familial clustering of diseases in humans has a genetic basis. Emphasizes the role of full genome knowledge in expediting this process of gene discovery. Stresses the role of statistical inference in interpreting genomic information. Population genetics, and the central role of understanding variation in the human genome in mediating variation in disease risk, are explored in depth. Methods such as homozygosity mapping, linkage disequilibrium mapping, and admixture mapping are examined. The format is a series of lectures with classroom discussion. Assignments include a series of problem sets and a term paper.
outcome: Become familiar with technologies for genome assembly, single-nucleotide polymorphism discovery, and SNP genotyping., Learn basic principles of population genetics as they relate to human genetic disorders segregating in a population., Become able to perform simple linkage analysis by LOD scoring., Acquire skills to solve quantitative problems in human population genetics., Develop understanding of how genome-wide association testing works, and its limitations., Learn how admixture mapping works and be able to apply it when appropriate., Develop an appreciation for the latest work in human origins, including Neanderthal and Denisovan Genomes., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800.

class: BIOMG 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses. This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIOMG 4981
class title: Teaching Experience in Principles of Biochemistry, Indv
description: BIOMG 4981 offers training and experience for undergraduate teaching assistants in BIOMG 3300 (Introductory Biochemistry: Individualized Instruction). Teaching assistants are required to complete a weekly written assignment, attend a weekly two-hour TA training meeting and to spend six hours per week in the Biochemistry Study Center answering student questions, grading written quizzes, and administering oral quizzes. Teaching Assistants are evaluated based on the quality of written work submitted, observations at the weekly meetings and Study Center shifts, as well as on the mid-term and end-of-semester course evaluations.
outcome: Students will demonstrate a deeper-level understanding of the concepts in BIOMG 3300., Students will become skilled at creating and maintaining a comfortable working environment for diverse groups of learners., Students will become proficient in active listening techniques and they will learn how to tailor their questions to probe different levels of knowledge (remembering, applying, etc.)., Students will be able to clearly and effectively articulate responses to student questions on BIOMG 3300 course concepts., Students will learn to grade student quizzes carefully and impartially and they will appreciate the importance of handling sensitive student quiz records ethically., Students will work in small groups to solve course-related problems and they will function as a team to efficiently manage a fast-paced Study Center., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300, or BIOMG 3350, or BIOMG 3310 and BIOMG 3320.

class: BIOMG 4982
class title: Teaching Leadership in Principles of Biochemistry, Indv
description: BIOMG 4982 gives students who have successfully served as a BIOMG 3300 Teaching Assistant (as part of BIOMG 4981) a second opportunity at teaching the class and the added privilege of assisting the course instructor in leading and mentoring the incoming teaching assistant group. In addition to the required leadership responsibilities, students in BIOMG 4982 are required to review the material on a weekly basis and to spend six hours per week in the Biochemistry Study Center. Teaching Leaders are evaluated based on observations made during their Study Center shifts, as well as on the mid-term and end-of-semester course evaluations. 
outcome: Students will demonstrate a deeper-level understanding of the concepts in BIOMG 3300., Students will become skilled at creating and maintaining a comfortable working environment for diverse groups of learners., Students will become proficient in active listening techniques and they will learn how to tailor their questions to probe different levels of knowledge (remembering, applying, etc.)., Students will be able to clearly and effectively articulate responses to student questions on BIOMG 3300 course concepts., Students will learn to grade student quizzes carefully and impartially and they will appreciate the importance of handling sensitive student quiz records ethically., Students will work in small groups to solve course-related problems and they will function as a team to efficiently manage a fast-paced Study Center., Students will learn how to become effective leaders and mentors., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 4981.

class: BIOMG 5350
class title: Introductory Biology: Cell and Developmental Biology
description: The course introduces molecular mechanisms that underlie the organization, division, and growth of individual cells; how they organize during embryonic development to form functional tissues and organs in multicellular organisms; and how their misbehavior contributes to disease.  The learning outcomes below indicate the topics and skills that students should master upon completion of the course.
outcome: The internal organization of the cell, cellular organelles and their main functions., The four major classes of macromolecules in cells., The diversity of structures that allow proteins to execute nearly all of a cell's myriad functions., The molecular basis of various cellular processes such as secretory pathway and the cell cycle., The signaling pathways used by cells to communicate with each other and with their environment., Individual cell behaviors that act to promote form and function of embryonic tissue and organs., How to apply concepts learned in class to interpret hypothetical experimental observations., How to acquire scientific information from various databases and from the primary literature., 

class: BIOMG 6000
class title: Genomics
description: Introduction to principles underlying the organization of genomes and the methods of studying them, emphasizing genome-wide approaches to research. Covers the application of genomics methodologies for addressing issues including gene regulation, evolution, complex systems, genetics, and gene: phenotype relationships. Landmark and timely genomics papers and other research developments will be discussed. Basic bioinformatics tools will be incorporated.
outcome: Students will be able to learn modern Genomics technologies and how they are applied in scientific research., Students will be able to develop the ability to propose experiments designed to answer biological questions, with an emphasis on Genomics approaches., Students will be able to think independently and creatively in solving problems with the tools of Genomics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two majors-level biology courses and BIOMG 2800; or BIOMG 3300, or BIOMG 3350 or BIOMG 3310 /BIOMG 3320 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 6300
class title: Principles of Biochemistry, Individualized Instruction
description: Thirteen units that cover protein structure and function, enzymes, basic metabolic pathways, DNA, RNA, protein synthesis, and an introduction to recombinant DNA techniques. No formal lectures, auto-tutorial format.
outcome: Students will be able to discuss and describe in writing: The structure and function of biologically important macromolecules, the general catalytic and regulatory mechanisms of enzymes, the energetics, organization, and regulation of metabolic pathways, the mechanisms underlying DNA replication, DNA repair, transcription and its regulation, and translation (protein synthesis), the techniques used to study proteins, membranes, and nucleic acids., Students will be able to think analytically and use quantitative reasoning to solve biochemical problems., Students will be able to formulate conclusions based on the analysis of biochemical experimental results., Students will be able to recognize that the advancement of knowledge is facilitated by collaboration between individuals from a wide variety of backgrounds and beliefs., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one majors-level biology course, and one year general chemistry, and one of the following courses or their equivalents: CHEM 1570, CHEM 3530, CHEM 3570, CHEM 3590, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 6310
class title: Proteins: Structure, Function and Evolution
description: Students in this course will discover the complex behavior of proteins and how they impact biology. The course is divided into three different sections. The first section is a classic protein structure-function section incorporating advanced enzyme kinetics. The second section of this course will review how proteins evolve and how this can be practically analyzed. After the course's final section, students will be able to integrate the theory behind purifying and analyzing proteins with modern spectroscopy and microscopy techniques.
outcome: Construct a hierarchy detailing the levels of protein structure and the general theory of protein folding., Perform a quantitative and qualitative assessment of enzyme function, including evaluating equations defining enzyme reaction mechanisms and constructing models defining the specific steps in enzymatic reactions., Develop methodologies to purify and characterize proteins and enzymes that demonstrate their ability to integrate theory and practical application for single particle analysis., Describe methods to acquire and synthesize information related to protein sequence and structure evolution., Model the relationship between homologous proteins across kingdoms of life and generate phylogenetic trees., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses: BIOMG 3300, BIOMG 3350, BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320, and CHEM 3570, and CHEM 3580.  

class: BIOMG 6311
class title: Principles of Biochemistry: Proteins and Metabolism
description: The chemical reactions important to biology, and the enzymes that catalyze these reactions, are discussed in an integrated format. Topics include: protein folding, enzyme catalysis, bioenergetics, and key reactions of synthesis and catabolism.
outcome: In this lecture-based course, students start from fundamental principles of chemistry, physics, and mathematics as the framework for understanding biology. Homework problems every week, together with a quiz or else major exam every week, enable students to assimilate the fundamental principles while the complexity of biochemistry is being mastered systematically.  Students will be able to explain how each component of biochemistry is connected to others., Most of the information that students are asked to master is contained in approximately 800 pages of text reading assignments, along with the course-specific 320 page Lecture Guide. In addition, students are assigned to go online to the Protein Data Bank and examine primary scientific information about protein and carbohydrate structure. Students will be able to choose any protein or small molecule whose structure has been determined, and display that molecule on a computer screen., Students learn to use simple but quantitative principles to understand important biological phenomena. We emphasize the interconnections of vast amounts of information, particularly in metabolism, that are the basis for how cells stay alive. Students will be able to explain principles such as protein folding, the chemiosmotic model, and enzyme kinetics using basic principles of physical chemistry., Students are required to communicate their understanding of lecture material every week on a quiz or more midterm and final exams. Students learn to grasp visual representations of macromolecules, especially proteins, by means of a weekly molecular graphics assignment using the freeware PyMOL. By the end of the semester, students will be able to manipulate and explain protein and carbohydrate images by use of PyMOL, and explain these in terms of biochemical principles., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one majors-level biology course and one year general chemistry and any of the following organic chemistry courses: CHEM 1570 or CHEM 3530 or CHEM 3570 or CHEM 3590 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 6330
class title: DNA Biology
description: BIOMG 6330 covers selected aspects of the molecular biology and biochemistry of DNA metabolism. Topics include DNA replication, genetic recombination, DNA repair, DNA transposition, somatic hypermutation, and DNA editing technologies. Students will become familiar with this work by reading papers that include genetic, biochemical, structural, and computational biology approaches.
outcome: Demonstrate a working knowledge of the fundamentals of DNA metabolism and how it is coordinated with other processes in the cell., Apply quantitative reasoning from the basic principles of physical, chemical and biochemical sciences to solve problems in the areas described in Objective 1., Communicate the fundamental concepts of DNA metabolism both in written and oral formats., Critically analyze and criticize data from journal articles, and propose additional experiments., Reconstruct experimental approaches by reading scientific abstracts that describe an exciting finding in DNA metabolism., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one of the following courses: BIOMG 3300, BIOMG 3350, BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320.

class: BIOMG 6380
class title: RNA in Biology and Medicine
description: It is hypothesized that RNA may have been the earliest life form on earth. Nowadays RNA plays three vital roles in biology. It serves as an information carrier to guide biological processes; it adopts sophisticated 3D structures to promote recognition and catalysis; and it promotes cellular compartmentalization. Each of these properties has been exploited for therapeutics and medicine. This course explores the idea of a prehistorical "RNA World", dives deep into interesting topics in the RNA biology, and explains their connection to modern medicine. Representative topics include the mechanisms of CRISPR-Cas and RNA interference and their wide-spread applications in research and medicine, ribosome as an antibiotic target, perturbing splicing to cure genetic diseases, connection between telomerase and cancer/aging, etc. Classical experiments as well as up-to-date research are covered in this class. A portion of each class is devoted to student presentations and discussion. After completing this class, students should:
outcome: Understand the chemical structure of RNA., Understand the structure motifs in RNA., Have a good understanding of the experimental and computational methods in RNA biology research., Understand the catalytic strategies in ribozymes., Understand the ligand recognition mechanism in riboswitches., Understand the role of RNA in important RNA-protein complexes., Understand the important topics in translation., Understand the RNA splicing/processing/editing process., Understand the mechanism of RNA interference in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300, or BIOMG 3350 or BIOMG 3310/BIOMG 3320 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 6400
class title: Laboratory in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
description: Students in this course will carry out experiments in protein biochemistry and molecular biology in an engaging laboratory environment. The protein biochemistry projects include protein purification (salt fractionation, ion exchange chromatography, affinity chromatography, size exclusion chromatography, and immunoprecipitation), protein analysis (SDS PAGE, BN PAGE, immunoblotting, and activity assays), and determination of enzyme kinetic parameters (Vmax, KM, and kcat). The molecular biology projects include CRISPR-mediated genome editing, nucleic acid purifications (plasmid DNA and RNA), gene expression analysis (RT-PCR and splicing), agarose gel electrophoresis, restriction endonuclease digestion, PCR, DNA cloning, transformation, and DNA sequence analysis. The course is organized around interesting projects that illustrate how different techniques are uniquely suited to answer a scientific question.
outcome: Plan, carry out, and interpret the results of laboratory experiments., Use modern laboratory techniques to purify and study proteins and to purify and work with nucleic acids., Understand the theoretical basis of the laboratory techniques., Use on-line databases to assist in data analysis., Create and use a laboratory notebook., Effectively communicate results of laboratory work, in both oral and written form., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 3300 or BIOMG 3350 or BIOMG 3310-BIOMG 3320 (at least one of BIOMG 3310-BIOMG 3320 completed but one may be taken concurrently).

class: BIOMG 6810
class title: Population Genetics
description: Population genetics is the study of the transmission of genetic variation through time and space. This course will provide a comprehensive introduction to the fundamental concepts and methods in population genetics, with a focus on exploring how patterns of genetic variation are connected to the underlying evolutionary processes. Topics include genetic drift, mutation, coalescence theory, demography, population structure, selection, fitness, quantitative traits, selective sweeps, and adaptation at the molecular level. Emphasis is placed on the interplay between theory, computer simulations, and the analysis of genetic data from natural as well as experimental populations. We will also discuss efforts to connect genotype with phenotype and ultimately fitness. Specific case studies will include the evolution of drug resistance, genetic ancestry mapping, experimental evolution of microbes, and the genetic structure and demographic history of human populations.
outcome: Describe and interpret the fundamental evolutionary processes that shape patterns of genetic variation within and between populations., Develop simple computer simulations of fundamental evolutionary processes., Apply appropriate mathematical and computational analyses for inferring evolutionary parameters from population genomic data., Evaluate the power and limitations of inferring evolutionary parameters from population genomic data., Explain the application of population genetics to fields such as conservation biology, agriculture, and medicine., Critically assess current research findings in population genetics., Discuss the ethical and societal implications of population genetics research., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800, BIOEE 1780, or equivalents.

class: BIOMG 6850
class title: Developmental Biology
description: This course is primarily concerned with the causal basis of developmental events, mainly focusing on animal development. We will be learning how a fertilized egg becomes an animal. Topics covered will include embryonic organization, role of genes in development, inductive interactions, morphogenesis and pattern formation. Subject matter will include not only what we know about development but also how we learned it.
outcome: Explain the pros and cons of the major animal model systems used in development biology, such as C. elegans, Drosophila, amphibians, fish, mouse, and human cells., Understand the nature of experimental research as the basis for our current understanding in developmental biology., Interpret results of developmental biology experiments, and draw conclusions from them., Describe general developmental mechanisms, including terms and concepts of developmental biology (e.g., induction, autonomous specification, morphogens, differential adhesion, etc.)., Discuss biological information that underlies ethical issues such as stem cells and human cloning., Read critically primary literature on a chosen topic through literature enrichment exercises., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMG 6871
class title: Human Genomics
description: Applies fundamental concepts of transmission, population, and molecular genetics to the problem of determining the degree to which familial clustering of diseases in humans has a genetic basis. Emphasizes the role of full genome knowledge in expediting this process of gene discovery. Stresses the role of statistical inference in interpreting genomic information. Population genetics, and the central role of understanding variation in the human genome in mediating variation in disease risk, are explored in depth. Methods such as homozygosity mapping, linkage disequilibrium mapping, and admixture mapping are examined. The format is a series of lectures with classroom discussion. Assignments include a series of problem sets and a term paper.
outcome: Become familiar with technologies for genome assembly, single-nucleotide polymorphism discovery, and SNP genotyping., Learn basic principles of population genetics as they relate to human genetic disorders segregating in a population., Become able to perform simple linkage analysis by LOD scoring., Acquire skills to solve quantitative problems in human population genetics., Develop understanding of how genome-wide association testing works, and its limitations., Learn how admixture mapping works and be able to apply it when appropriate., Develop an appreciation for the latest work in human origins, including Neanderthal and Denisovan Genomes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800.

class: BIOMG 6980
class title: Graduate Student Teaching Assistant Experience in Molecular Biology and Genetics
description: This course is designed for graduate students in Graduate Fields of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology (BMCB) and Genetics, Genomics, and Development (GGD) who will serve as teaching assistants (TA) in undergraduate courses offered in the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics (MBG). BMCB and GGD teaching assistants will take this course concurrently with their first TA assignment. The goal of the course is to provide teaching assistants with pedagogical skills in active learning, assessing student learning, leading discussions, grading, and best teaching practices for TA'ing MBG courses. Students will discuss their teaching experiences with their peers and gain feedback on their teaching effectiveness. An initial class meeting will help prepare students for the first day of class and provide tips for working with a teaching team. Throughout the semester, semi-weekly milestone meetings will focus on issues pertaining to graduate TAs, such as balancing research with teaching, interacting with students and course instructor, and special circumstances that may arise throughout the semester. Students will be encouraged to meet with their course instructor to gain feedback and to share their experiences with members of the course.
outcome: Students will be able to apply modern pedagogical methods to their teaching experience in MBG courses., Students will be able to apply active learning strategies and other effective teaching strategies to any MBG course where they serve as a teaching assistant., Students will be able to evaluate the learning of undergraduates by designing and grading various assessments., Students will be able to communicate effectivity through oral and written forms., Students will be able to interpret and apply feedback that further develops their teaching skills., 

class: BIOMG 7860
class title: Research Seminar in Genetics and Development
description: Each graduate student presents one seminar per year based on his or her thesis research. The student then meets with the thesis committee members for an evaluation of the presentation.

class: BIOMG 8330
class title: Research Seminar in Biochemistry
description: Each student presents one seminar per year on his or her thesis research and then meets with instructors and thesis committee members for evaluation.

class: BIOMG 8369
class title: Foundational Skills for Graduate School and Beyond
description: The course will focus on helping students successfully navigate the graduate experience, covering diverse topics relevant to the broader experience and realities of graduate school. Occasional guest lectures and panels will be included. Topics will include:
outcome: Identify resources relevant to biomedical research., Demonstrate effective strategies for success in graduate school., Give scientific talks about biomedical research., 

class: BIOMG 8375
class title: Scientific Communication: Research Proposal Writing
description: This is a tri-field course that is required of all second-year graduate students in the Fields of BMCB, GGD and Biophysics. The overall goal of this course is to help students develop scientific writing skills and to become familiar with the scientific peer review process, each of which will be achieved through active learning experiences. Students will learn to develop research ideas and communicate them effectively in the context of a written research proposal, using the format of an NSF Predoctoral Fellowship application.
outcome: Develop and assemble a research proposal., Justify the bigger impact and significance of their proposed research., Develop a research hypothesis, a set of specific aims, and enough narrative detail for a fellowship application., Evaluate and communicate their critique of the fellowship applications of their peers., Receive and process the critique of their own fellowship application., 

class: BIOMI 1120
class title: Microbes, the Earth, and Everything
description: We live on a microbial earth. If we happen to consider microbes in our daily lives most people conjure images of disease, but in reality we depend on microbes to sustain our world. This course showcases the vast microbial world that hides in plain sight all around us and use microbial examples to explore both fundamental biological principles and the scientific method. Course modules emphasize basic concepts from evolution, molecular biology and genetics, diversity, and ecology. Learn about the tiny titans and miniature monsters that are the life support system of our planet, how they have shaped human civilizations, and how they reveal the unifying principles of life. This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
outcome: Describe the major biogeochemical cycles of the Earth., Recognize and identify the unifying molecular and biochemical characteristics of living organisms., Describe the importance of evolution as a cornerstone of biology., Apply the scientific method, as well as learn how science uses objective observation and empirical measurement to evaluate alternative ideas concerning the underlying principles that govern biological, physical and chemical processes., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (BIO-AG)

class: BIOMI 2100
class title: Genesis
description: This class will explore the current theories about the chemical origins of life on earth, and will then use these insights to discuss the search for life on other planets, inside the Solar system and outside. Topics will include origin of the Sun, the Big Bang, the formation of Earth, the origin of life, from the prebiotic synthesis of amino acids, nucleobases, and other building blocks of life, the evolution of primitive protocells, the earliest RNA-based catalysts, the evolution of protein synthesis machinery, and the origins of eukaryotic cells. We will conclude with strategies and progress in identifying life on other planets in our solar system and on planets orbiting other stars.
outcome: Students will be able to summarize and evaluate knowledge and theories about the formation of a stars, the Earth, planets and a temperate hydrosphere on the surface of the primitive earth., Students will be able to critically evaluate experiments and theories about the abiotic formation of biologically molecules and their polymerization into macromolecules, and will identify gaps in these theories., Students will be able to critique theories about the RNA world and the evolution of protein synthesis machinery., Students will be able to critique theories about the RNA world and the evolution of protein synthesis machinery., Students will be able to critique theories about the RNA world and the evolution of protein synthesis machinery., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOG 1140  or BIOG 1500  or BIOMG 1350, or equivalent college level course that addresses DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.

class: BIOMI 2500
class title: Public Health Microbiology
description: This course will use a variety of teaching methods (including historical and current case studies and databases) to help students understand basic principles of microbiology as they apply to the emergence, transmission, pathogenicity, and control of infectious human disease. Major topics include water and food borne disease, zoonotic diseases, sexually transmitted diseases and antibiotic resistance.
outcome: Describe and apply investigative methods to studies in public health microbiology., Explain core concepts in microbiology (including the basic characteristics of viruses, bacteria, fungi and protozoa) as they relate to public health issues., Compare and contrast models of infectious disease with respect to pathogens, reservoirs, modes of transmission and control., Analyze the social, economic, and cultural challenges to protecting the public by preventing infectious disease., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: the equivalent of two semesters of majors-level biology and one semester general chemistry.

class: BIOMI 2900
class title: General Microbiology Lectures
description: Comprehensive overview of the biology of microorganisms, with emphasis on bacteria. Topics include microbial cell structure and function, physiology, metabolism, genetics, diversity, and ecology. Also covers applied aspects of microbiology such as biotechnology, the role of microorganisms in environmental processes, and medical microbiology.
outcome: Explain the defining characteristics of the major groups of microorganisms and viruses, and their functional roles in human and environmental systems., Explain core concepts relating to microbial cell structure and function, microbial growth and physiology, and microbial evolution and systematics., Explain microbial transformations of energy and matter as they relate to microbial growth and biogeochemical processes., Explain how microbes manage genetic information, its expression, storage, exchange, and evolution., Explain how microbial adaptations facilitate their function in diverse habitats including human hosts., Apply microbiological principles and models in a scientific framework to analyze and solve diverse biological problems that relate to human health and the environment., Critically evaluate information about microbiology from various sources., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of introductory biology (or AP biology) and one semester of chemistry, (or AP Chemistry).

class: BIOMI 2911
class title: General Microbiology Laboratory
description: This class will introduce you to current concepts and laboratory techniques in microbiology. Our goal is to show you how scientists use experiments to learn about the microbes around us, with an emphasis on bacteria. This course complements the Microbiology lecture by providing students with hands-on investigations into the microbial world.
outcome: Demonstrate an ability to formulate hypotheses and design experiments, based on the scientific method., Analyze and interpret results from a variety of methods in microbiology, and apply these methods to analogous situations., Use mathematical reasoning and graphing skills to solve problems in microbiology., Effectively communicate fundamental concepts of microbiology., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: BIOMI 3210
class title: The Gut Microbiome
description: The microbes on and in our bodies are as abundant as our own cells. These diverse microorganisms provide us with metabolic capacities beyond our own and are essential to good health, but can also play a role in disease.This course will introduce the microbes of the human body, discuss their origins, adaptations to the body, molecular interactions, and associations with health and disease.
outcome: Students will be able to describe how the gut microbiome affects host health., Students will be able to explain the potential impact of genetics, environment, and nutrition of the microbiome., Students will be able to explain what experimental tools are used to examine the microbiome and how the data those tools generate is evaluated., Students will be able to critically analyze news reports and popular press articles that pertain to the gut microbiome and personal/public health., Students will be able to evaluate the significance and shortcomings of claims made in primary scientific publications about the gut microbiome., Students will be able to aggregate the information needed to produce scientifically justified presentations that describe advances in gut microbiome science and offer an informed opinion about the significance of those advances., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMI 3500
class title: Marine Microbes and Disease in a Changing Ocean
description: Marine microorganisms fuel globally significant elemental cycles through their activities. They also drive diseases in multicellular life through pathogenesis, modulation of host-associated microbiomes, and through induction of stressors (e.g. toxins, hypoxia). The purpose of this course is to provide junior- and senior-level students a background in biological oceanography, marine microbial ecology, biogeochemistry, and disease pathogenesis in marine habitats. The emphasis of the course is on understanding how biology affects and is affected by the oceans, and how organisms interact to produce ocean biological phenomena. The course is divided into 4 modules: 1) Marine microbial diversity and ocean structure; 2) Ocean biogeochemistry; 3) Marine disease pathogenesis; and 4) Pollution and climate change. This course will equip students with foundations for further undergraduate courses in ocean sciences and environmental dynamics, and for graduate studies in biological oceanography and marine biology.
outcome: Describe the taxonomic and functional diversity of marine microorganisms in both natural and human influenced habitats of the ocean., Examine the contributions of each group of marine organisms, from viruses through metazoa, to overall ecosystem function and elemental cycling., Access the current threats to marine ecosystems on local and global scales through pollution and climate change., Describe how microorganisms cause disease and how diseases influence marine ecosystems., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOEE 1610, BIOEE 1780.

class: BIOMI 3940
class title: Applied and Food Microbiology
description: Food Science 3940 will focus on the origin, transmission, consequences, and management of diverse microbiota throughout the food chain. Topics in this course generally include: 1) the microbiota of different food systems, 2) the physiology, metabolism, and pathogenesis of important groups of microbes, and 3) application of food microbiology to the industrial sector. You will receive a basic education in interdisciplinary subjects that require knowledge of microbiology, food safety, epidemiology, public health, biotechnology, and cell metabolism. Knowledge and expertise gained in this course will support your qualification for a future career in food science, biotechnology, or microbiology.
outcome: Identify the microbiota relevant to a given food product, process, or environment., Describe the causes of and mechanisms behind foodborne disease, fermentation, and spoilage., Determine the relevant conditions or measures needed to promote safety, fermentation, or reduce spoilage., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 and BIOMI 2911.

class: BIOMI 4090
class title: Principles of Virology
description: Principles of Virology is a course designed to convey the basic principles of virus biology, to illustrate the key concepts of virus-host interactions and their consequences for virus replication and pathogenesis of viral disease. The course focuses on identifying unifying principles underlying virus biology and highlighting important differences between viruses. Viruses infecting plants, animals, and bacteria will be discussed. A graduate level component of this course will further focus on seminal virology research findings and the cutting-edge technologies used in modern experimental virology through primary literature reading assignments provided in addition to the lecture material.
outcome: Identify, describe, and discuss the basic concepts of virus particle structure (including enveloped and non-enveloped viruses) and the biochemical and cell biological bases for virus entry, multiplication, and egress of different families of RNA, double-stranded RNA, and DNA viruses., Explain the basic principles of virus transmission in different phyla and recognize the features of viral pathogenesis and the role of host defenses in combatting viral infection., Understand the factors that contribute to virus evolution and emergence, and be able to apply that understanding to situations involving virus outbreaks that affect global health., Identify and recognize selected disease-causing viruses of animals (humans included), including COVID19, cancer, and flu., Identify and evaluate individual steps in a virus' replication cycle that can be effectively targeted by anti-viral drugs for pharmaceutical intervention of virus diseases., Discuss effective strategies for a) prevention of infection through development of viral vaccines and b) treatment of diverse human diseases by gene therapy through the design and administration of genetically engineered virus vectors., Be able to read about any virus and understand its replication and pathogenic strategies based on common principles of viral replication and pathogenesis., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about virus entry, replication, and egress in cell culture., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about viral pathogenesis and the use of animal models., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMI 4850
class title: Bacterial Genetics
description: Bacteria and archaea are the driving force behind all major environmental cycles on the planet, they are critical players in a broad range of agricultural and industrial applications, as well as being responsible for many of the greatest medical challenges and opportunities facing humanity. Additionally, the underpinning of all molecular biology basically comes from work in bacteria. Systems being discovered in bacteria and archaea are continuing to drive the latest technologies in gene modification and genetic engineering across the life sciences. This course will provide a fundamental understanding of the genetics of bacteria and archaea and how this information can be used to understand the uniquely important role they play in the natural environment and current and future applications.
outcome: Gain an understanding of how bacteria and archaea maintain and pass on genetic information and the unique nature of their genomes., Learn how bacteria and archaea evolve through mutations and the exchange of genetic information via mobile elements (e.g. bacteriophage, plasmids, transposons) and direct DNA uptake., Understand how the repertoire encoded in bacterial and archaeal genomes is efficiently regulated through gene and global regulation., Understand the bacterial and archaeal systems used across biology for gene editing and synthetic biology (e.g. CRISPR/Cas, gene assembly)., Understand how bacterial genetics was used to answer many of the fundamental questions in biology., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800.

class: BIOMI 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses. This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIOMI 6090
class title: Principles of Virology
description: Principles of Virology is a course designed to convey the basic principles of virus biology, to illustrate the key concepts of virus-host interactions and their consequences for virus replication and pathogenesis of viral disease. The course focuses on identifying unifying principles underlying virus biology and highlighting important differences between viruses. Viruses infecting plants, animals, and bacteria will be discussed. A graduate level component of this course will further focus on seminal virology research findings and the cutting-edge technologies used in modern experimental virology through primary literature reading assignments provided in addition to the lecture material.
outcome: Identify, describe, and discuss the basic concepts of virus particle structure (including enveloped and non-enveloped viruses) and the biochemical and cell biological bases for virus entry, multiplication, and egress of different families of RNA, double-stranded RNA, and DNA viruses., Explain the basic principles of virus transmission in different phyla and recognize the features of viral pathogenesis and the role of host defenses in combatting viral infection., Understand the factors that contribute to virus evolution and emergence, and be able to apply that understanding to situations involving virus outbreaks that affect global health., Identify and recognize selected disease-causing viruses of animals (humans included), including COVID19, cancer, and flu., Identify and evaluate individual steps in a virus' replication cycle that can be effectively targeted by anti-viral drugs for pharmaceutical intervention of virus diseases., Discuss effective strategies for a) prevention of infection through development of viral vaccines and b) treatment of diverse human diseases by gene therapy through the design and administration of genetically engineered virus vectors., Be able to read about any virus and understand its replication and pathogenic strategies based on common principles of viral replication and pathogenesis., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about virus entry, replication, and egress in cell culture., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about viral pathogenesis and the use of animal models., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMI 6850
class title: Bacterial Genetics
description: For description and learning outcomes, see BIOMI 4850.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800.

class: BIOMI 7970
class title: Scientific Communication Skills
description: The ability to communicate effectively is essential for success as a scientist. The primary goal of this course is to provide students with an opportunity to develop self-confidence and refine their formal oral presentation skills. Students are asked to present topical seminars that are critically evaluated by the instructor. Feedback for improving the presentation and peer evaluations are emphasized.
outcome: Read, analyze and critically evaluate the information in articles from the current microbiology literature., Organize and understand microbiology research reports well enough to discuss the information and to present it to a diverse audience., Explore the practice and theory of science communication, focusing on the major mechanisms (written and oral)., Practice and improve these communication skills., 

class: BIOMI 7990
class title: Microbiology Seminar
description: The microbiology seminar series hosts local, national, and international speakers for research seminars. Students in BioMi 7990 gain insight into current topics and cutting-edge methods in microbiology, and are provided with networking opportunities with established scientists, as well as opportunities to present their own seminars.
outcome: Dialog with presenters on campus and around the globe about their research., Raise and hear questions related to methods, experimental design, and context., Network with potential colleagues and collaborators., 

class: BIOMS 3110
class title: Principles of Animal Physiology
description: General course in animal physiology emphasizing principles of operation, regulation, and integration common to a broad range of living systems from the cellular to the organismal level. Structure/function relationships are stressed along with underlying physico-chemical mechanisms.
outcome: Students should be able to rationalize the operation of major organ systems., Students should understand the organization of multisystem regulatory loops., Students should be able to derive and understand the basic equations defining the physical operating characteristics of organ systems., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOG 1500 and BIOG 1440, or BIOG 1445, or one year of college biology, one year chemistry and mathematics, or equivalent AP credit.

class: BIOMS 3190
class title: Laboratory in Physiology
description: Student-conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments designed to illustrate basic physiological processes, physiological research techniques, instrumentation, experimental design, and interpretation of results. Techniques include anesthesia, surgical procedures, dissection, and real-time computer recording and analysis. Experiments with isolated living tissues or live anesthetized animals examine properties of membranes and epithelia, blood, nerves, skeletal and smooth muscle; cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, and reproductive function and their regulation by the nervous and endocrine systems.
outcome: After this course the student will be able to compute physical phenomena, including electrochemical gradients and mechanical forces in the physiology of live systems., After this course the student will be able to describe the scientific method including experimental design, formulating, and testing hypotheses., After this course the student will be able to work cooperatively in small groups., After this course the student will be able to communicate scientific concepts and experimental results in written and oral form., After this course the student will be able to use statistics to assess the significance of results., After this course the student will be able to research the published scientific findings and interpret them., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOAP 3110.

class: BIOMS 4090
class title: Principles of Virology
description: Principles of Virology is a course designed to convey the basic principles of virus biology, to illustrate the key concepts of virus-host interactions and their consequences for virus replication and pathogenesis of viral disease. The course focuses on identifying unifying principles underlying virus biology and highlighting important differences between viruses. Viruses infecting plants, animals, and bacteria will be discussed. A graduate level component of this course will further focus on seminal virology research findings and the cutting-edge technologies used in modern experimental virology through primary literature reading assignments provided in addition to the lecture material.
outcome: Identify, describe, and discuss the basic concepts of virus particle structure (including enveloped and non-enveloped viruses) and the biochemical and cell biological bases for virus entry, multiplication, and egress of different families of RNA, double-stranded RNA, and DNA viruses., Explain the basic principles of virus transmission in different phyla and recognize the features of viral pathogenesis and the role of host defenses in combatting viral infection., Understand the factors that contribute to virus evolution and emergence, and be able to apply that understanding to situations involving virus outbreaks that affect global health., Identify and recognize selected disease-causing viruses of animals (humans included), including COVID19, cancer, and flu., Identify and evaluate individual steps in a virus' replication cycle that can be effectively targeted by anti-viral drugs for pharmaceutical intervention of virus diseases., Discuss effective strategies for a) prevention of infection through development of viral vaccines and b) treatment of diverse human diseases by gene therapy through the design and administration of genetically engineered virus vectors., Be able to read about any virus and understand its replication and pathogenic strategies based on common principles of viral replication and pathogenesis., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about virus entry, replication, and egress in cell culture., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about viral pathogenesis and the use of animal models., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMS 4150
class title: Essential Immunology
description: Course introduces the immune system and key concepts in immunology. Focuses on the human system and medically relevant pathogens and immunization. Course delves into the cell biology of signaling, genetic recombination and gene expression. Students will learn how immune cells develop, communicate and carry out immune responses. Students will learn how vaccines work and use clinical cases to apply knowledge of immune concepts. Course ends with a brief survey of immune-mediated diseases, cancer immunology and immunotherapies
outcome: State the purpose of the immune system & typical threats that it addresses., Relate the functions of cells, mediators & tissues involved in immune responses., Recount how extraordinarily diverse lymphocytes & antibodies meet evolving threats., Describe protective immune responses against pathogens in different tissues., Apply key immune concepts to clinical cases of immune deficiency., Explain how vaccines and monoclonal antibody therapies work., Practice science literacy skills on the topics of immunization and public health., 

class: BIOMS 4980
class title: Undergraduate Supervised Teaching
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training. Students meet with a discussion or laboratory section and regularly discuss objectives with the course instructor.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.
 

class: BIOMS 6090
class title: Principles of Virology
description: Principles of Virology is a course designed to convey the basic principles of virus biology, to illustrate the key concepts of virus-host interactions and their consequences for virus replication and pathogenesis of viral disease. The course focuses on identifying unifying principles underlying virus biology and highlighting important differences between viruses. Viruses infecting plants, animals, and bacteria will be discussed. A graduate level component of this course will further focus on seminal virology research findings and the cutting-edge technologies used in modern experimental virology through primary literature reading assignments provided in addition to the lecture material.
outcome: Identify, describe, and discuss the basic concepts of virus particle structure (including enveloped and non-enveloped viruses) and the biochemical and cell biological bases for virus entry, multiplication, and egress of different families of RNA, double-stranded RNA, and DNA viruses., Explain the basic principles of virus transmission in different phyla and recognize the features of viral pathogenesis and the role of host defenses in combatting viral infection., Understand the factors that contribute to virus evolution and emergence, and be able to apply that understanding to situations involving virus outbreaks that affect global health., Identify and recognize selected disease-causing viruses of animals (humans included), including COVID19, cancer, and flu., Identify and evaluate individual steps in a virus' replication cycle that can be effectively targeted by anti-viral drugs for pharmaceutical intervention of virus diseases., Discuss effective strategies for a) prevention of infection through development of viral vaccines and b) treatment of diverse human diseases by gene therapy through the design and administration of genetically engineered virus vectors., Be able to read about any virus and understand its replication and pathogenic strategies based on common principles of viral replication and pathogenesis., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about virus entry, replication, and egress in cell culture., Identify, describe, and choose appropriate experimental approaches to address questions about viral pathogenesis and the use of animal models., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMS 6150
class title: Essential Immunology
description: Course introduces the immune system and key concepts in immunology. Focuses on the human system and medically relevant pathogens and immunization. Course delves into the cell biology of signaling, genetic recombination &amp; gene expression. Students will learn how immune cells develop, communicate and carry out immune responses. Students will learn how vaccines work and use clinical cases to apply knowledge of immune concepts. Course ends with a brief survey of immune-mediated diseases, cancer immunology and immunotherapies, topics that are covered in more detail in BIOMS 6250 in spring.
outcome: State the purpose of the immune system & typical threats that it addresses., Relate the functions of cells, mediators & tissues involved in immune responses., Recount how extraordinarily diverse lymphocytes & antibodies meet evolving threats., Describe protective immune responses against pathogens in different tissues., Apply key immune concepts to clinical cases of immune deficiency., Explain how vaccines and monoclonal antibody therapies work., Practice science literacy skills on the topics of immunization and public health., 

class: BIOMS 6151
class title: Essential Immunology and Infectious Disease: Research Methods and Design I
description: This course, which is intended to go hand in hand with BIOMS 6150 (Essential Immunology), will teach students how to read and critically interpret immunology and infectious disease research. The course will introduce common experimental methods and feature pillars of immunology and infectious disease articles. Students will practice applying key concepts and experimental methods that are covered concurrently in BIOMS 6150.
outcome: Gain a strong foundation in applying scientific method to the stud of immunology., Critically read immunology studies., Explain common research methods., Interpret experimental data., Build skills of experimental design and evaluating the conclusions of published studies., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BIOMS 6150 or permission of instructor.

class: BIOMS 7900
class title: Seminars in Stem Cell Research
description: This course is organized as work-in-progress presentations by faculty, post-docs, and students participating in stem cell research. Each student in the Cornell Training Program in Stem Cell Research presents one seminar per year based on their research. The student then meets with the thesis committee members for an evaluation of the presentation.
outcome: Explain the relevance of presented project to stem cell research and regenerative medicine., Identify potential opportunities for cross-disciplinary and collaborative research in presented project., 

class: BIONB 1220
class title: FWS: Special Topics in Neurobiology and Behavior
description: The First-Year Writing Seminar is about introducing concepts in neuroscience and behavior and writing extensively about them. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: BIONB 2210
class title: Neurobiology and Behavior I: Introduction to Behavior
description: General introduction to the field of animal behavior. Topics include evolution and behavior, behavioral ecology, sociobiology, chemical ecology, communication, orientation and navigation.
outcome: To develop your awareness of, and curiosity about, the diversity of natural history and the exciting puzzles raised by the behavior of living things., To gain mastery at asking and answering questions about the mechanisms and evolution of behavior by performing observations, generating hypotheses, deriving predictions, and developing tests to investigate the causes of behavior., To compare the social systems of different species and to understand how the study of behavior is relevant to your other courses, to your own life, and to the world around you., To learn to read, interpret and critically evaluate scientific discoveries communicated through the primary, peer-reviewed literature., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two majors-level biology courses.

class: BIONB 3240
class title: Behavioral Neuroscience Laboratory
description: This course is designed to provide an introduction to experimental research on the neural basis of behavior and cognition in animals. Topics will include basic neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, neural and hormonal control of behavior, and learning and memory. Students will gain extensive hands on experience with a variety of laboratory techniques, and animal species, and behaviors.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: PSYCH 2230 or BIONB 2220.

class: BIONB 3300
class title: Introduction to Computational Neuroscience
description: Covers the basic ideas and techniques involved in computational neuroscience. Surveys diverse topics, including neural dynamics of small networks of cells, neural coding, learning in neural networks and in brain structures, memory models of the hippocampus, sensory coding, and others.
outcome: Basic understanding of current theories of brain function., How to construct representations from tuning curves., Plasticity and how it relates to memory., Models of human memory., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2220 or permission of instructor.

class: BIONB 4200
class title: Topics in Neurobiology and Behavior
description: Courses on selected topics in neurobiology and behavior; can include lecture and seminar courses.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: BIONB 4320
class title: Neural Circuits for Motor Control in Health and Disease
description: Almost all behaviors-from speech to a cross court forehand-are mediated by the contraction of muscles. This course examines the neural origins of motor behavior, from simple reflexes to complex learned motor sequences. Ascending the motor hierarchy, we will study the neuromuscular junction, spinal cord, brainstem, cerebellum, basal ganglia and cerebral cortex. At each level, we will examine the structure and function of the local microcircuit, as well as diseases-such as myasthenia gravis, stroke, ALS, ataxia and Parkinson's-that result from that circuit's dysfunction.
outcome: To understand the structure and function of the vertebrate motor system, including neural mechanisms of human movement disorders., To critically read and comprehend primary literature., To distill large amounts of information into central concepts of nervous system function, and to articulate these concepts both verbally and in writing., To creatively come up with new ideas and design experiments to test them., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2220 or ECE 2100.

class: BIONB 4380
class title: Topics in Computational Methods for Neurobiology and Behavior
description: This course is intended for advanced undergraduate and graduate students interested in computational methods for analyzing neural and behavioral data. Potential topics include signal processing, spectral analysis, information theory, cluster analysis, fitting parametrized models and maximum entropy models. We will also look at applications of modern machine learning techniques to scoring, analyzing and interpreting data. Although the course will be geared towards students who are new to computational methods, familiarity with calculus is recommended. Students will be asked to give a short oral presentation at the end of the semester on the use of methods from the class to analyze a real dataset.
outcome: By the end of this class, students will be able to analyze real neurobiological and behavioral data using a suite of traditional and modern methods in computational neuroscience., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic calculus is recommended.

class: BIONB 4720
class title: Visual Ecology
description: This course will explore the wide diversity in visual systems across organisms and how evolution shapes these visual systems to solve a wide range of daily challenges. Vision often plays a key role in navigation, finding food, avoiding predators, and even choosing potential mates, but there isn't one best visual system for all these tasks in all environments. We will be examining how differences in eye structure and photoreceptors lead to differences in spatial acuity, color vision, polarized light detection, and even the speed of vision.
outcome: Classify the diversity in visual systems across organisms., Explain methods and interpret data from a primary publication in this field., Formulate hypotheses about an organism's behavior by studying their visual system., Construct an engaging scientific outreach program., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2210. 

class: BIONB 4980
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in biology courses.  This experience may include supervised participation in a discussion group, assisting in a biology laboratory, assisting in field biology, or tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: BIONB 7201
class title: Research Design in the Study of Animal Social Behavior
description: A weekly journal club-style discussion. Graduate students may be expected to present a summary of their research or a summary of research in the literature related to their thesis once per year.
outcome: Become exposed to a wide variety of lines of study of animal behavior., Deepen your understanding of how to conduct research on animal behavior., Get to know the various graduate students, postdocs, and faculty studying animal behavior., Get critical, but also encouraging, feedback on your own research project., 

class: BIONB 7210
class title: Introductory Graduate Survey in Neurobiology and Behavior
description: Designed to assist students in mapping their graduate careers and in choosing and pursuing transformative and tractable thesis topics. The core of the course will be open-ended discussions directed by paired neurobiology and behavioral ecology faculty on novel research frontiers in the study of mechanisms and the evolution of behavior (including in the zone of their conceptual intersection). Occasional laboratory experiences may also be included. Professional development topics will include how to: navigate graduate school, allocate time between reading, thinking creatively, and investing in research, design experiments, write grant proposals, give talks, and publish peer-reviewed papers.
outcome: To know and understand the current frontiers of both behavioral and neurobiological studies, including which unanswered questions are considered to be the most important ones, and which questions might actually be answerable in a doctoral thesis project or longer term study., To hone critical thinking skills with respect to identifying important questions and designing strategies to address them., To become familiar with the most compelling current tools, both conceptual and experimental, for answering behavioral and neurobiological questions, 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BIONB 2210 (Fall) and BIONB 2220 (Spring).

class: BIONB 7640
class title: Plant-Insect Interactions Seminar
description: Group intensive study of current research in plant-insect interactions. Topics vary from semester to semester but include chemical defense, coevolution, insect community structure, population regulation, biocontrol, tritrophic interactions, and mutualism.
outcome: Read, synthesize, and discuss findings from original scientific research in the ecology and evolution of plants interacting with their environment., 

class: BME 1310
class title: Introduction to Biomedical Engineering
description: An introduction to the field of biomedical engineering with emphasis on application. Specific applications include biomechanics, bioimaging, bioinstrumentation, biotechnology/nanofabrication, artificial organs, cancer therapy and vaccines.
outcome: To understand the underlying molecular, cellular, physiological and engineering that govern the field of biomedical engineering., 

class: BME 2000
class title: Biomedical Transport Phenomena
description: Quantitative analysis of transport phenomena in physiological systems, including fluid mechanics and mass transfer. Fluid statics, mass and momentum conservation, laminar and turbulent flow, microscale and macroscale analytical methods, mass transport with biochemical reactions, applications to transport in tissue and organs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 2930 or equivalent.

class: BME 2081
class title: Experiential Learning Seminar II
description: This seminar focuses on building professional skills while activating curricular content within the context of experiential learning activities. Students will pursue individual and team based exercises, with reflective discussions. This is the second part of the Experiential Learning Seminar (BME 2080).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 2080.

class: BME 2210
class title: Biomaterials: Foundations and Application in Medicine
description: This course focuses on the fundamental understanding of implantable materials with respect to their design, analysis and use in human health. The class content includes the fundamentals of materials synthesis/fabrication, methods of characterization/analysis, interactions between materials with tissues, quantitative analysis of material properties and how materials are used to impact human health.

class: BME 3010
class title: Cellular Principles of Biomedical Engineering
description: This course will provide students a fundamental understanding of cellular systems essential for engineering effective biomedical applications. The course comprises of three modules.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 1350 and BME 2010, or BIOG 1440 and BIOG 1445, or BIOMG 3300 and MATH 2930, or permission of instructor.

class: BME 3030
class title: Biomedical Circuits, Signals and Systems
description: This course will cover the mathematical foundation to analyze signals and model the behavior of biomedical systems in the time and frequency domains, and help students develop the mindset and skills necessary to produce high-quality measurements of a physiological or biological variable. Labs involving the design and construction of biomedical circuits to quantify a physiological or biological function will foster a broad perspective on biological and biomedical measurement, and provide practical application of linear systems theory and measurement principles covered in lectures.
outcome: Identify variables that could be measured to quantify a physiological function, then design and defend an approach to measure those variables., Design and analyze the behavior of circuits with appropriate sensors, filters, and amplifiers for measuring those variables., Construct and empirically optimize circuits from these designs so that they are operational with minimal noise and meet experimental needs., Acquire high quality data on the variable with appropriate controls and calibrations, while identifying and minimizing systematic bias and random noise., Design and implement appropriate signal and image processing approaches for the measured variables and analyze these data to characterize the physiological function., Conceive of and conduct an experimental plan to test a hypothesis about the physiological function using the measurement and analysis tools developed., Analyze data acquired in a thoughtful and statistically relevant way to test the hypothesis., Produce high quality oral presentations and writing that present experimental approach and findings., Develop strategies to acquire, consolidate, and use new information to meet challenges., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930 and PHYS 2213 or equivalent. Corequisite: MATH 2940 

class: BME 3080
class title: BME Clinical Immersion Program I
description: This course will help students prepare for participation in the Clinical Immersion Program. BME undergraduates will be able to fully grasp the role engineers play in the medical ecosystem and the important contributions they make to medicine. Through a range of exposures to real-world practices and professionals, immersion scholars will take away a deeper understanding of the relationship between medicine and engineering. This experience will directly inform their final semesters and senior design project at Cornell and affect their future education and careers.

class: BME 3300
class title: Introduction to Computational Neuroscience
description: Covers the basic ideas and techniques involved in computational neuroscience. Surveys diverse topics, including neural dynamics of small networks of cells, neural coding, learning in neural networks and in brain structures, memory models of the hippocampus, sensory coding, and others.
outcome: Basic understanding of current theories of brain function., How to construct representations from tuning curves., Plasticity and how it relates to memory., Models of human memory., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2220 or permission of instructor.

class: BME 4010
class title: Biomedical Engineering Analysis of Metabolic and Structural Systems
description: This course focuses on applying techniques of engineering analysis to quantify function and dysfunction of human physiologic systems. Thematic areas include the cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, and renal systems. Emphasis will be placed on developing mathematical models to understand function and dysfunction across tissue scales, and implementing these with experimental data to make biomedical engineering judgments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020, MATH 2930, BIOMG 1350 and BME 2010 or BIOG 1440.

class: BME 4080
class title: Biomedical Engineering Design I
description: This course articulates fundamental engineering design theory and practice for biomedical engineering applications. Design specification establishment, tolerance/robustness, validation, and documentation strategies are presented. Product archaeology, human factors, FDA/Insurance regulatory concepts, and product lifecycle/iteration are also pursued through lectures and case studies.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3030, BME 4190 or BME 4390 or BME 4490.

class: BME 4190
class title: Laboratory Techniques for Molecular, Cellular, and Systems Engineering
description: This class will provide students with the skills needed for the design, fabrication, and characterization of experimental approaches relevant to Molecular, Cellular, and Systems engineering. Lectures will integrate three modules: the first module will focus on stem cell biology, differentiation, and characterization. The second module will provide a thorough understanding of polymeric scaffold design and characterization for tissue engineering applications. The third module will focus on analytic techniques suitable to analyze molecular, cellular, and systems-level signaling changes of cells in response to varied microenvironmental context. All three modules will be taught in a manner that will enable students to design and implement experimental approaches for cell manufacturing, tissue regeneration, and drug testing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3010, BME 3020, BME 3110 or BME 3210.

class: BME 4390
class title: Circuits, Signals and Sensors: Instrumentation Laboratory
description: This class provides students with the basic skills needed to design and fabricate biomedical and bioanalytical instrumentation. Lectures cover analog and digital electronics, microcontrollers, microcontroller interfacing and firmware programming (in C). Circuit simulation (using CircuitLab) is covered as is an instruction to schematic capture and printed circuit board layout software (Eagle). Emphasis is on designing and building analog circuitry for sensors, analog to digital conversion and microcontroller/device and microcontroller/PC interfacing. Lab exercises involve the design and construction of a number of biomedically related circuits.
outcome: Become proficient with analog electronics and analog circuit design at the level required to design and build a various biomedical devices. (ABET a,k), Become proficient with digital electronics and digital circuit design at the level required to digitize signals and collect data from a biomedical device. (ABET a,k), Become proficient at programming of microcontrollers in C to implement microcontroller/peripheral device interfacing and microcontroller/PC communications and data transfer. (ABET a,k), 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Engineering common math/phyics and CS 1112.

class: BME 4410
class title: Biofluid Mechanics
description: For description and learning outcomes, see MAE 4650.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 and ENGRD 2202 or MAE 3230 or equivalents, or permission of instructor.

class: BME 4490
class title: Biomechanics Laboratory
description: This course focuses on mastering experimental techniques related to measuring the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials and biological tissues. Students will learn techniques for measuring mechanical properties of cardiovascular and musculoskeletal tissues in tension, compression, shear, and bending. Students will learn to apply non-linear models to describe the behavior of elastic, viscoelastic, poroelastic, and hyperelastic materials.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3410 or BME 3210 or permission of instructor.

class: BME 4900
class title: Independent Undergraduate Project in Biomedical Engineering
description: Research or projects by an individual or a small group of undergraduates.

class: BME 4901
class title: Honors Thesis
description: Intended for students pursuing the research honors program in BME. This course is the culmination of the program's honors project requirement. Students enrolled in the BME Honors program will prepare an honors thesis based on the subject matter of a BME 4900 project from the previous semester, under the supervision of their research mentor.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 4900 and acceptance in the BME honors program.

class: BME 4970
class title: Undergraduate Teaching in Biomedical Engineering
description: The student assists in teaching a biomedical engineering course appropriate to their previous training. The student may meet with a discussion or laboratory section, prepare course materials, grade assignments, and regularly discuss objectives and techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.

class: BME 5010
class title: BME MEng Professional Engagement Seminar
description: Students must attend and report on 10 self-selected seminars to fulfill the requirements of the course.

class: BME 5100
class title: Clinical Preceptorship for Biomedical Engineers
description: Preceptorship, is a well-known process in healthcare education and described as a short term relationship between a student as novice and an experienced health care professional, who provides individual attention to the student's learning needs within a clinical environment. The BME 5100 leverages this methodology and enable our students to experience the dynamics of a clinical environment, observe the routine practice of a clinician, identify potential needs, and through a formal process evaluate the merits and provide ideas on how to address these perceived needs. The instructor will educate the students about the clinical environment, dress and behavior code, interaction with hospital staff and patients, as well as monitor and manage each student-preceptor team. The instructor and other engineering faculty will also review the student's experiences and assist in any assignments the preceptor may have given to the student. The preceptor will guide the student with in depth knowledge of the related anatomy, physiology and pathology associated with his specialty. The preceptor will also provide the student the ability to participate and observe as well as generate weekly assignments. The sponsoring institution and the preceptors are very interested in the identified problems, the ideas resultant of the process, and how these ideas could be addressed by applying principles of engineering. The student will provide feedback in the form of a final report as well as an on-site poster presentation at the end of the academic year. The merited ideas will be placed in the pipeline for the sponsored design projects (BME 5910, BME 5920).

class: BME 5110
class title: Stem Cell Bioengineering
description: This course explores the interface of stem cell biology and bioengineering and biotechnology and will examine the how quantitative modeling and analysis approaches inform stem cell-based biotechnologies and medical therapies. The course will cover embryonic and adult stem cell biology fundamentals, cell and molecular bioengineering concepts and techniques, biomolecular and genetic therapies to regulate stem cell function, and design of biomimetic and bioreactor environments for stem cell differentiation and derivation. These concepts will be conveyed in a mixture of assigned readings; interactive lectures; quantitative, descriptive, and computational problem sets; primary literature discussions and reviews; quizzes; and a small-team final grant proposal project.
outcome: To identify key features of adult and pluripotent stem cell systems., To summarize molecular and cell engineering techniques to modulate stem cell functions., To design bioengineering strategies for enhancing stem cell-based regenerative medicine therapies., To analyze scientific publications for critical assessment of research methods, experimental design, and statistical/quantitative outcomes., To produce teaching modules on stem cell biology and revise/refine them for real-world dissemination., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3010 and BME 3020, or equivalent.

class: BME 5390
class title: Circuits, Signals and Sensors: Instrumentation Laboratory
description: This class provides students with the basic skills needed to design and fabricate biomedical and bioanalytical instrumentation. Lectures cover analog and digital electronics, microcontrollers, microcontroller interfacing and firmware programming (in C). Circuit simulation (using CircuitLab) is covered as is an instruction to schematic capture and printed circuit board layout software (Eagle). Emphasis is on designing and building analog circuitry for sensors, analog to digital conversion and microcontroller/device and microcontroller/PC interfacing. Lab exercises involve the design and construction of a number of biomedically related circuits. This course serves as an introduction to the skills needed by biomedical engineers who chose to focus on instrument design and imaging.
outcome: Become proficient with analog electronics and analog circuit design at the level required to design and build a various biomedical devices.   (ABET a,k), Become proficient with digital electronics and digital circuit design at the level required to digitize signals and collect data from a biomedical device.   (ABET a,k), Become proficient with hardware programming of microcontrollers in C to implement microcontroller/peripheral device interfacing and microcontroller –PC communications and data transfer. (ABET a,k), 

class: BME 5410
class title: Biofluid Mechanics
description: For description and learning outcomes, see MAE 5650. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 and ENGRD 2202 or MAE 3230 or equivalents, or permission of instructor.

class: BME 5500
class title: Innovation and Design of Biomedical Technologies
description: This course was designed to addresses the business, regulatory, and technical challenges throughout the many design phases of a biomedical technology product life cycle. It is a required and essential course for the BME Masters of Engineering program and it lays the foundation to the also required BME 5910 (Design Project) and BME 5920 (Performance of Design Project).

class: BME 5510
class title: Medical Device Regulatory Affairs for Biomedical Engineers
description: This course is designed to provide a working knowledge of Medical Device Regulatory Affairs specifically for Biomedical Engineers. It is geared for both experienced biomedical engineering professionals as well as those new to the industry and is intended for non-regulatory professionals who need a better understanding of the regulatory requirements necessary to bring medical devices to market. This course demonstrates important regulatory requirements and concepts using case study discussions of real products from a variety of clinical specialties. Strategies for using regulation as a competitive advantage will also be discussed. Instructor will be lecturing virtually (on-line) but in real-time.

class: BME 5750
class title: Biomaterials and Drug Delivery in the Immune System

class: BME 5850
class title: Current Practice in Tissue Engineering
description: Covers fundamental biological principles and engineering concepts underlying the field of tissue engineering and describes specific strategies to engineer tissues for clinical use along with examples.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BME 3010 or BME 3020 or BME 4010.

class: BME 5910
class title: Preliminary Study for Design Project
description: Design and economic evaluation of a biomedical engineering device or therapeutic strategy. Team projects are encouraged.

class: BME 5911
class title: Industrial Projects: Preliminary Study for Design Project
description: The first of two required design courses for the biomedical engineering Master of Engineering program. Teams starting a new project will focus on the identification and ideation phases of a design process. The teams will identify and/or verify unmet healthcare need(s), roughly explore potential concepts, devise the requirements of the technology to be engineered, and implement the first interaction of a conceptual prototype.

class: BME 5920
class title: Performance of Design Project
description: Once a proposal for the project has been approved by the Sponsor or Faculty member, the student must ("deliver on time and under budget") produce a tangible work product. Scheduling activities, ordering supplies, assembling, testing the device or procedure, and documenting the work and outcomes are the key expectation for the project. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 5910.

class: BME 5921
class title: Industrial Projects: Performance of Design Project
description: This course is the execution phase of your design project. From BME 5500 and BME 5911 your team should have applied Yock's Biodesign process and devised the product requirements of the solution to be engineered during this semester. The objective of the course is the engineering of a fully functional proof-of-concept prototype (product) based on the previously defined and proposed set of requirements.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 5911. Corequisite: BME 5500.

class: BME 5930
class title: Independent Design Project
description: Graduate-level, non-thesis research or studies on special projects in biomedical engineering.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BME 5910.

class: BME 5940
class title: Biomedical Engineering Internship
description: Off-campus internship with industry in which a student gains knowledge and experience in the field of biomedical engineering.

class: BME 6110
class title: Stem Cell Bioengineering
description: This course explores the interface of stem cell biology and bioengineering and biotechnology and will examine the how quantitative modeling and analysis approaches inform stem cell-based biotechnologies and medical therapies. The course will cover embryonic and adult stem cell biology fundamentals, cell and molecular bioengineering concepts and techniques, biomolecular and genetic therapies to regulate stem cell function, and design of biomimetic and bioreactor environments for stem cell differentiation and derivation. These concepts will be conveyed in a mixture of assigned readings; interactive lectures; quantitative, descriptive, and computational problem sets; primary literature discussions and reviews; quizzes; and a small-team final grant proposal project.
outcome: To identify key features of adult and pluripotent stem cell systems., To summarize molecular and cell engineering techniques to modulate stem cell functions., To design bioengineering strategies for enhancing stem cell-based regenerative medicine therapies., To analyze scientific publications for critical assessment of research methods, experimental design, and statistical/quantitative outcomes., To produce teaching modules on stem cell biology and revise/refine them for real-world dissemination., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3010 and BME 3020, or equivalents.

class: BME 6120
class title: Precision and Genomic Medicine
description: Genomic medicine is gaining momentum across the entire clinical continuum. This course will provide an introduction to the latest advances in genome research and their impact on medicine. This graduate level course focuses on quantitative engineering principles and precision measurements.

class: BME 6130
class title: Advanced Microbiome Engineering
description: The human microbiome touches upon every organ system and contributes to a wide range of disorders. Manipulating the human microbiome is becoming a new paradigm of treating disease. These efforts range from modifying the genomes of organisms or the composition of organisms in the gut, developing designer phage or personalized cocktails of organisms, engineering live bacterial biosensors, and bioprospecting within the gut microbiome for bioactive compounds. In this course, we will discuss new engineering tools and techniques for achieving new diagnostic or therapeutic outcomes. The course will be heavily based on reviewing recently published primary articles. Discussions will involve topics related to molecular and tissue engineering, and systems and synthetic biology.

class: BME 6210
class title: Engineering Principles for Drug Delivery
description: Application of engineering design principles to problems in drug formulation and delivery. Specific topics include traditional drug formulation, mechanisms and kinetics of pharmaceutical stability, stimuli-sensitive systems, controlled-release devices, prodrugs, targeted drug delivery, transdermal drug delivery, biomaterials, and gene therapy. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: background in organic and polymer chemistry or permission of instructor.

class: BME 6350
class title: Introduction to Neurotechnology
description: This course provides a survey of the latest technologies for recording and controlling brain activity. The class has three parts. Part I consists of lectures to introduce the relevant concepts in neurobiology. Part II, in seminar format, discusses approaches to read out neural signals, such as large-scale electrophysiology and optical imaging. Part III, in seminar format, focuses on approaches to modify neural dynamics, including electrical, optical, and viral strategies. Emphases will be placed on how the technologies may be integrated into brain machine interfaces, and what promise they have for treating brain disorders. The course assumes no background in neuroscience. It is intended for engineers who want to know more about neural engineering and neurobiologists who are interested in the latest methods.

class: BME 7010
class title: Biomedical Engineering Ph.D Seminar
description: An ongoing orientation and mentoring seminar for first-year Ph.D. students that includes research presentations by faculty and students as well as discussions and assignments on such topics as academic ethics, writing technical papers, and publishing.

class: BME 7020
class title: Biomedical Engineering Research Seminar
description: Designed to train graduate students in public presentation of scientific data. Students in their third year and beyond are required to give an annual seminar on their research; all students are required to attend the seminars and to provide constructive feedback to others on the quality of their presentation and data.

class: BME 7030
class title: Graduate Student Teaching Experience
description: Guided individual experience in laboratory instruction and/or lectures/recitation instruction. Provides a preparatory teaching experience for graduate students considering an academic career.

class: BME 7160
class title: Immersion Experience in Medical Research and Clinical Practice
description: Summer immersion at Weill Medical College. Students participate in lectures, rounds, and seminars; observe surgeries; and solve medical problems presented by the staff.

class: BME 7900
class title: Biomedical Engineering Graduate Colloquium
description: Research-based seminars. May meet with other seminar series as appropriate.

class: BSOC 2051
class title: Ethical Issues in Health and Medicine
description: In the rapidly changing world of healthcare, complex ethical issues arise from interpersonal interactions between patients and clinicians to broad controversies that propel medicine into headline news. This course will examine ethical challenges in contemporary medicine, healthcare, and biomedical research from the bedside to health policy. Using case-vignettes, news stories, narratives, and readings from the healthcare, ethics, and social science literature we will examine issues from multiple vantage points. A range of topics will be explored including the patient-clinician relationship, heath care decision-making, issues at the beginning and end-of-life, technological advances, human experimentation, healthcare systems, and distributive justice. The course will also examine the fluidity of normative ethical boundaries, and how context and point of reference influence our perceptions of and approach to ethical issues. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: BSOC 2071
class title: Introduction to the History of Medicine
description: This course offers an introductory survey of the history of medicine (principally in Europe and the United States) from classical antiquity to the early twentieth century. Using a combination of both primary and secondary sources, students will learn about the "Hippocratic Heritage" of contemporary western medicine; medicine in late antiquity; faith and healing in the medieval period; medicine and knowledge in the Islamic world; medicine during the Renaissance (particularly the rise of the mechanical philosophy); medicine in the age of Enlightenment; professionalization, women-doctors and midwives, and battles over 'quackery' in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; the role of medicine in colonialism and empire; and the promises and perils of modern medicine (dramatic decreases in mortality on the one hand, the rise of Eugenics and the importance of Medicine to the National Socialist State on the other). As well as this temporal survey, we will consider a number of ongoing themes: race, bodily difference, and medicine; medicine and the environment; women, gender, and medicine; the history of the body; the history of sexuality; and the close connections between forms of social order and forms of medical knowledge. The course meets three times a week (for two lectures and a section) and is open to all.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: BSOC 2420
class title: Nature-Culture: Ethnographic Approaches to Human Environment Relations
description: One of the most pressing questions of our time is how we should understand the relationship between nature, or the environment, and culture, or society, and whether these should be viewed as separate domains at all. How one answers this question has important implications for how we go about thinking and acting in such diverse social arenas as environmental politics, development, and indigenous-state relations. This course serves as an introduction to the various ways anthropologists and other scholars have conceptualized the relationship between humans and the environment and considers the material and political consequences that flow from these conceptualizations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: BSOC 2561
class title: Medicine and Healing in China
description: An exploration of processes of change in health care practices in China. Focuses on key transitions, such as the emergence of canonical medicine, of Daoist approaches to healing and longevity, of "scholar physicians," and of "traditional Chinese medicine" in modern China. Inquries into the development of healing practices in relation to both popular and specialist views of the body and disease; health care as organized by individuals, families, communities, and states; the transmission of medical knowledge; and healer-patient relations. Course readings include primary texts in translation as well as secondary materials.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: BSOC 2599
class title: Medicine, Magic and Science in the Ancient Near East
description: This course explores the history of medicine and other sciences in the ancient Near East, broadly defined. In addition to medicine, the other scientific disciplines covered in this course include mathematics, astrology, astronomy, alchemy, zoology, among others. Geographically, the course traces the transmission of scientific knowledge in ancient Babylonia, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, and beyond. As such, the course offers students a tour of different ancient civilizations and corpora. Students read selections from cuneiform Akkadian tablets, Egyptian Christian Coptic spellbooks, rabbinic sources such as the Talmud, among many other works. At the same time, students will be required to critically engage recent scholarship in the history of science and medicine as a way to help frame their analyses of the ancient materials. The course interrogates how ancient civilizations transmitted and received scientific knowledge, as well as the relationship between what we today tend to call science, medicine, magic, and religion. This course is intended not only for students in the Humanities and Social Sciences, but also for those majoring in science or medicine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: BSOC 3230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: BSOC 3311
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Environmental governance is defined as the assemblage of institutions that regulate society-nature interactions and shape environmental outcomes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. Institutions, broadly defined, are mechanisms of social coordination including laws (formal) and social norms (informal) that guide the behavior of individuals. Participants in the course will explore the roles of governments, markets, and collective action in environmental management and mismanagement. We will emphasize interactions among leading environmental policy strategies: public regulation, market-based incentives, and community-based resource management. The course is focused around a set of analytic perspectives. These theoretical frameworks allow us to synthesize empirical observations and material changes in ways that inform our understanding of contemporary evolution of environmental policy and management.
outcome: Students will gain familiarity with the concepts, theories, and applications of institutional analysis applied to environment., Students will develop critical awareness of the strengths and weakness of states, markets, and collective structures as resources for social regulation., Students will develop an historical appreciation of environmental policy in order to reflect critically on contemporary status and trends., Students will develop an interdisciplinary understanding of environmental policy through exploration of economic, sociological, and political scientific perspectives., Students will be exposed to a broad range of environmental problems and policy and management responses. Coverage includes national and international cases, and analyses at multiple scales., Students will develop capacity to conduct institutional analysis including the specification of a research question, policy research, synthesis, and communication., Students will build generic competencies including reading of scientific and popular texts, writing, oral communication, group work, and critical analysis., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: BSOC 3751
class title: Independent Study
description: Projects under the direction of a Biology and Society faculty member are encouraged as part of the program of study within the student's concentration area. Applications for research projects are accepted by individual faculty members. Students may enroll for 1 to 4 credits in BSOC 3751 Independent Study with written permission of the faculty supervisor and may elect either the letter grade or the S-U option. Students may elect to do an independent study project as an alternative to, or in advance of, an honors project. Information on faculty research, scholarly activities, and undergraduate opportunities are available in the Biology and Society Office, 303 Morrill Hall. Independent study credits may not be used in completion of the major requirements.

class: BSOC 4991
class title: Honors Project I
description: Students must register for 4 credits each semester (4991-4992) for a total of 8 credits. After the first semester, students receive a letter grade of "R"; a letter grade for both semesters is submitted at the end of the second semester whether or not the student completes a thesis or is recommended for honors. Minimally, an honors thesis outline and bibliography should be completed during the first semester. In consultation with the advisors, the director of undergraduate studies will evaluate whether the student should continue working on an honors project. Students should note that these courses are to be taken in addition to those courses that meet the regular major requirements. If students do not complete the second semester of the honors project, they must change the first semester to independent study to clear the "R" and receive a grade. Otherwise, the "R" will remain on their record and prevent them from graduating.

class: BSOC 4992
class title: Honors Project II
description: Students must register for the 4 credits each semester (BSOC 4991-BSOC 4992) for a total of 8 credits. After the first semester, students receive a letter grade of "R"; a letter grade for both semesters is submitted at the end of the second semester whether or not the student completes a thesis or is recommended for honors. Minimally, an honors thesis outline and bibliography should be completed during the first semester. In consultation with the advisors, the director of undergraduate studies will evaluate whether the student should continue working on an honors project. Students should note that these courses are to be taken in addition to those courses that meet the regular major requirements. If students do not complete the second semester of the honors project, they must change the first semester to independent  study to clear the "R" and receive a grade. Otherwise, the "R" will remain on their record and prevent them from graduating.

class: BTRY 3010
class title: Statistics I
description: Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, and linear regression.
outcome: Students will be able to design an experiment using randomization techniques., Students will be able to use R Markdown for reproducible research., Students will be able to produce effective graphical summaries of collected data., Students will learn how sampling distributions are determined and utilized for statistical analysis., Students will understand why some estimators are more desirable than others., Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, ANOVA, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, linear regression, and multiple linear regression., Students will be able to assess the quality of a statistical analysis., 
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of calculus.

class: BTRY 3080
class title: Probability Models and Inference
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, the method of moments, sampling distributions and confidence intervals.
outcome: Students will be able to manipulate random variables and their distributions using differential and integral calculus., Students will be able to derive properties of standard probability., Students will be able to derive maximum likelihood estimators for standard probability distributions and discuss their properties., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200 or their equivalents. MATH 1120 or equivalent and MATH 2220 or equivalent. 

class: BTRY 3100
class title: Statistical Sampling
description: Theory and application of statistical sampling, especially in regard to sample design, cost, estimation of population quantities, and error estimation. Assessment of nonsampling errors. Discussion of applications to social and biological sciences and to business problems. 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: BTRY 4030
class title: Linear Models with Matrices
description: The focus of this course is the theory and application of the general linear model expressed in its matrix form. Topics will include: least squares estimation, multiple linear regression, coding for categorical predictors, residual diagnostics, anova decomposition, polynomial regression, model selection techniques, random effects and mixed models, maximum likelihood estimation and distributional theory assuming normal errors. Homework assignments will involve computation using the R statistical package.
outcome: Students will be able to discuss the mathematical foundations of linear statistical models using matrix algebra., Students will be able to use diagnostic measures to assess the validity of a given statistical model., Students will be able to analyze data involving both fixed and random factors., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, BTRY 3080 or equivalent, MATH 1920 or equivalent, MATH 2210 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: BTRY 4090
class title: Theory of Statistics
description: Introduction to classical theory of parametric statistical inference that builds on the material covered in BTRY 3080. Topics include: sampling distributions, principles of data reduction, likelihood, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, interval estimation, and basic asymptotic theory.
outcome: Describe the general principles of statistical estimation and testing., Design a statistical estimator in a principled way based on a description of a dataset., Analyze the theoretical properties of an estimator and a hypothesis test., Calculate and correctly interpret confidence intervals, p-values, statistical significance, and power., Recognize the general principles underlying common statistical procedures., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710 or equivalent and at least one introductory statistics course.

class: BTRY 4110
class title: Categorical Data
description: Categorical data analysis, including logistic regression, log-linear models, stratified tables, matched pairs analysis, polytomous response, and ordinal data. Applications in biological, biomedical and social sciences.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3020, BTRY 6020, or equivalent.

class: BTRY 4970
class title: Undergraduate Individual Study in Biometry and Statistics
description: Consists of individual tutorial study selected by the faculty. Because topics usually change from year to year, this course may be repeated for credit.

class: BTRY 4980
class title: Undergraduate Supervised Teaching
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training. Students meet with a discussion or laboratory section and regularly discuss objectives with the course instructor.

class: BTRY 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Permits outstanding undergraduates to carry out independent study of suitable problems under appropriate supervision. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of work.
 

class: BTRY 5010
class title: Statistics I
description: Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, and linear regression.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of calculus.

class: BTRY 5090
class title: Theory of Statistics
description: Introduction to classical theory of parametric statistical inference that builds on the material covered in BTRY 3080. Topics include sampling distributions, principles of data reduction, likelihood, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, interval estimation, and basic asymptotic theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710, or equivalent and at least one introductory statistics course.

class: BTRY 6010
class title: Statistical Methods I
description: Develops and uses statistical methods to analyze data arising from a wide variety of applications. Topics include descriptive statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, inference for a single population, comparisons between two populations, one- and two-way analysis of variance, comparisons among population means, analysis of categorical data, and correlation and regression analysis. Introduces interactive computing through statistical software. Emphasizes basic principles and criteria for selection of statistical techniques.
outcome: Learn to develop and use statistical methods to analyze data arising from a wide variety of applications. Students should learn to apply methodologies which include descriptive statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, inference for a single population, comparisons between two populations, one- and two-way analysis of variance, comparisons among population means, analysis of categorical data, and correlation and regression analysis., 

class: BTRY 6970
class title: Individual Graduate Study in Biometry and Statistics
description: Individual tutorial study selected by the faculty. Because topics usually change from year to year, this course may be repeated for credit.

class: BTRY 7900
class title: Graduate-Level Dissertation Research
description: Research at the Ph.D. level.

class: BTRY 7980
class title: Graduate Supervised Teaching
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training. Students meet with a discussion section, prepare course materials, and assist in grading. Credit hours are determined in consultation with the instructor, depending on the level of teaching and the quality of work expected.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least two advanced courses in statistics and biometry.

class: BTRY 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Research at the M.S. level.

class: BTRY 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Dissertation Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. candidates after "A" exam has been passed.

class: BURM 1121
class title: Elementary Burmese (Myanmar) I
description: This course is designed to give beginning learners a solid foundation in reading and writing Burmese. Reading and writing skills are essential first steps to learning the language, and this is the only course where you will learn the script. You will also learn some basic spoken Burmese and important grammatical concepts. Some of the assignments are completed online using interactive video and audio materials.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: BURM 2201
class title: Intermediate Burmese (Myanmar) I
description: This course is for you if you have taken elementary Burmese at Cornell or learned some Burmese elsewhere and know how to read and write Burmese script. You will continue learning all major aspects of the language at the intermediate level, including reading and understanding formal-style texts. Some of the assignments are completed online using interactive video and audio materials.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BURM 1122 or permission of instructor.

class: BURM 3301
class title: Advanced Burmese (Myanmar) I
description: This course is taught at the advanced level with focus on further development of all four skills. All materials used in the course are authentic Burmese stories, current event reports, radio plays, etc. The particular materials used in any given year may vary depending on the proficiency level of the students. For students who are involved in Burma/Myanmar related research, their projects may also become part of the course.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BURM 2202 or permission of instructor.

class: BURM 3309
class title: Advanced Reading in Burmese (Myanmar) I
description: This course will further advance the student's reading skills and, if needed, writing as well. Burmese texts of advanced-level complexity will be read, analyzed, and translated to English. A certain amount of discussion in Burmese is also part of the course, but the primary objective is to learn to read and understand the typical texts that appear on websites about current events, cultural trends, news from around the world, as well as short literary works by contemporary authors. Heritage speakers of Burmese as well as students who are learning Burmese as a foreign language are welcome. Reading materials are selected depending on the needs and interests of the students and differ from year to year.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BURM 3302 or permission of instructor.

class: CAPS 1621
class title: From Samurai to Superpower: Japan in World History I
description: How did Japan evolve from samurai to superpower?   We investigate this transformation in Japanese and world history over a two-semester sequence.  Students are free to enroll in either semester independently.  (All are welcome, but none required, to enroll in both semesters.)  We begin in early Japan: the birthplace of the sun goddess Amaterasu, the imperial court devoted to her, and the samurai who rose to rule under her sway.  Early Japan was also home to con-men and courtesans, mischievous gods and warring Buddhists, the world's first (and female!) novelist, and a surprisingly cosmopolitan culture of artists and scientists, comedians and entrepreneurs, human traffickers and international travelers.  Our first semester exploring this eclectic culture culminates in the early modern era (1600–1868), when under samurai rule, Japan developed many "modern" elements that laid the groundwork for the revolutionary changes and superpower status examined in the second semester.  We chart Japan's development not only through big events but also everyday life, delving into gender and sexuality, family and labor, arts and entertainment, and more.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: CAPS 2233
class title: Introduction to China: Beyond China
description: "China" and "Chinese" are no longer adequate terms for the study of Sinitic-language communities and cultures that evince politically tenuous and linguistically polyphonic relations with the People's Republic of China. This course introduces students to transnational literatures, film, and popular culture from formerly marginalized Chinese voices, and to the field of Sinophone Studies as a critical, interdisciplinary alternative. Students will study fiction and films from Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, the United States, and the PRC, along with critical works explaining the ways that diaspora, colonialism, comparative empires, and ethnic or minority studies have informed the rise of global Chinese studies beyond "China" as a homogenous, static entity.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CAPS 2262
class title: Medicine and Healing in China
description: An exploration of processes of change in health care practices in China. Focuses on key transitions, such as the emergence of canonical medicine, of Daoist approaches to healing and longevity, of "scholar physicians," and of "traditional Chinese medicine" in modern China. Inquries into the development of healing practices in relation to both popular and specialist views of the body and disease; health care as organized by individuals, families, communities, and states; the transmission of medical knowledge; and healer-patient relations. Course readings include primary texts in translation as well as secondary materials.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CAPS 2271
class title: China's Literary Heritage: An Introduction in Translation
description: This is an introductory course designed for, though not limited to, non-majors with or without any knowledge of Chinese language, history, or culture. It offers a guided survey of the history and development of major literary themes, genres, and traditions that still today are assumed to be an integral part of China's cultural identity. Readings include works of poetry, prose and fiction, all in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CAPS 3000
class title: Seminar on American Relations with China
description: A historical review of the fragile and volatile U.S.-China relationship from the opening by Richard Nixon in the early 1970s until the present. Several individual sessions will be led by current or former executive branch or congressional officials, business people, journalists, representatives of nongovernmental organizations and others who have worked in China or have participated in the making of U.S. policy toward China.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CAPS 4001
class title: China in Transition
description: This seminar, using faculty-directed research projects, is intended to survey China's transformation through revolution and reform since 1949, and to examine major issues under the themes of modernity and sustainability in the reform era.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS)

class: CAPS 4002
class title: Chinese Perspectives on International and Global Affairs
description: This course, offered by faculty members of Peking University's School of International Studies, provides Chinese perspectives on contemporary China's international relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: CAPS 4010
class title: Honors Thesis Tutorial I
description: Honors students conduct research to prepare a thesis on a topic of their own choosing under the direction of a faculty member. The application must be successfully submitted and an Honors Committee formed by the end of applicant's junior year in order for the student to be an honors candidate. Permission to enroll in CAPS 4020 is contingent upon the advisor's judgment of the viability of the student's honors thesis by the end of the semester.

class: CAPS 4020
class title: Honors Thesis Tutorial II
description: Honors students complete research and finish a thesis on a topic of their own choosing under the direction of a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CAPS 4010.

class: CAPS 4827
class title: China, Tibet and Xinjiang
description: Seminar intended to examine the increasingly complex relationship that has evolved between China and the rest of the international system, with particular focus on the rise of Chinese nationalism and the extent to which those in Tibet, Xinjiang, and, to a lesser extent, Taiwan, are contesting such a trend. In so doing, the course emphasizes the interrelated, yet often contradictory, challenges facing Beijing in regards to the task of furthering the cause of national unity while promoting policies of integration with international society and interdependence with the global economy.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: CAPS 4888
class title: Directed Study - Beijing
description: This directed study course allows CAPS students to enroll at Beida (Peking University) in courses offered to international students by the Peking University School of International Studies.

class: CAPS 4998
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: CAPS 4999
class title: CAPS Independent Study
description: Independent study course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: CEE 1160
class title: Modern Structures
description: A hands-on introduction to structural engineering, combining classroom demonstrations and presentations with laboratory experience. Students predict hurricane wind forces and design key elements in a high-rise building to resist those forces. Students design a residential wood-deck based on laboratory tests to stretch, compress, shear, split, and bend wooden specimens. Students build brick walls and fail them under simulated hurricane and tornado wind pressures, weld steel bars and pull them apart, and forensically examine the failures. Students use software to analyze and design steel truss bridges, and become proficient at using spreadsheets to perform routine structural calculations and graph the results. Students become familiar with structural concrete by designing, building and testing small-scale reinforced-concrete frames to resist large dynamic forces.
outcome: Apply mechanics principles, learn analysis/design process., Design, build, test model structures., Gain experience with working in teams., 

class: CEE 1165
class title: Climate Change and You, the Engineer
description: Our current students are the first generation that will feel the impacts of climate change, and the last generation that can do anything about it. The dual objectives of this course are to inform young pre-professional engineers of the factual science in the nexus of climate change/fossil fuels/renewable energy, and to inspire them to dive into that nexus now, and to begin to do something about untangling it as engineers in practice. In this nexus are key issues for civil engineers: water quality/quantity, emissions, renewable energy supply and structures, civil infrastructure systems engineering, energy economics, sustainability in megacities.

class: CEE 3040
class title: Uncertainty Analysis in Engineering
description: Introduction to statistics and data analysis for engineers. Covers probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables, parametric probability distributions commonly used in engineering practice and research, point estimation, sampling distributions, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, simple linear regression, and nonparametric statistics. Empirical examples from engineering problems are highlighted.
outcome: Introduce students to the basic framework provided by probability theory for analyzing problems exhibiting variability and uncertainty., Introduce students to the basic methods and concepts employed in statistics to estimate the parameters of models, make decisions, and to describe uncertainty., Prepare students to be able to use statistical methods with confidence during their professional careers (perhaps after further study)., 
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910 and MATH 1920, or equivalents.

class: CEE 3090
class title: Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering
description: Supervised study by individuals or groups of upper-division students on an undergraduate project or on specialized topics not covered in regular courses.

class: CEE 3101
class title: Introduction to Python for Engineering
description: Python is one the most popular programming languages for machine learning and data science in various engineering fields. This course rapidly introduces students to programming in Python, focusing on practical tools for data analysis, visualization, and scientific computing. We will learn to work with data, create visualizations, and write simple functions and scripts. We will install and use libraries such as NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas, and create and manage virtual environments. Basic computer science and software engineering concepts will be introduced, however, the focus of this short course is on learning to use Python as a computational tool for engineering and data analysis problems, and creating a foundation for continued learning.
outcome: Install and set up Python and additional computational libraries., Be fluent in the use of expressions, variables, functions, conditional statements, and loops., Use Python to load, analyze, and visualize data., Set up and use virtual environments such as Anaconda to install and manage packages and other tools, for project portability and collaboration., 

class: CEE 3310
class title: Fluid Mechanics
description: Covers hydrostatics, the basic equations of incompressible fluid flow, potential flow and dynamic pressure forces, viscous flow and shear forces, steady pipe flow, turbulence, dimensional analysis, laminar and turbulence boundary layer, flows around obstacles, and open-channel flow. Includes small-group laboratory assignments.
outcome: Develop an analytic foundation and physical/experiential sense in fluid statics and fluid dynamics., Develop general skills in dimensional analysis., Expand on students' abilities to identify and analytically state and solve engineering problems., Expand on students' abilities to use engineering judgment to assess the correctness of a solution approach and solutions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930, or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 3410
class title: Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering
description: This course covers the fundamentals of geotechnical engineering and deals with soil as an engineering material in civil and environmental applications. Topics include origins and descriptions of soil and rock, principles of effective stresses, stress distribution and ground settlements from surface loads, steady-state and time-dependent subsurface fluid flow, soil strength and failure criteria, earthwork construction and quality control, introduction to lateral earth pressures, and geotechnical exploration.
outcome: Develop a practical overview of soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering, and the application of important principles to civil infrastructure., Develop analytical skills in dealing with soil as a medium for water flow, structural support, and a primary building material., Gain direct experience with soil properties via laboratory testing and case studies to make justify decisions about the engineering significance of these properties., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 3790
class title: Introduction to Building Information Modeling (BIM) using Revit
description: The purpose of this course is to provide a general knowledge of the use of Revit to document and model all of the major architectural elements of a commercial project. You will learn the design and detailing aspects of commercial buildings including floor plans, interior and exterior elevations, wall and building sections, schedules, and construction drawing set. Lab assignments will be created utilizing Revit (latest version).
outcome: Students will have a basic knowledge of considerations involved in the preliminary design of small commercial buildings., Students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create a three-dimensional building model., Students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create construction drawings for a commercial building, including architectural floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, sections, and elevations. Graduate students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create structural framing plans., Students will be able to develop an architectural design and create a set of construction documents for a small commercial building, included in the set are architectural floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, sections, and elevations. Graduate students will be required to create foundation and structural framing plans., Students will be able to present the proposed design to the class, with oral explanations., 

class: CEE 4000
class title: Senior Honors Thesis
description: Supervised research, study, and/or project work resulting in a written report or honors thesis.

class: CEE 4010
class title: Undergraduate Engineering Teaching in CEE
description: Methods of instruction developed through discussions with faculty and by assisting with the instruction of undergraduates under the supervision of faculty.

class: CEE 4090
class title: CEE Undergraduate Research
description: Research in any area of civil or environmental engineering on problems under investigation by the department or of special interest to the student, provided that adequate facilities can be obtained. The student must review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, carry out an approved plan, and submit a formal final report.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: adequate training for work proposed.

class: CEE 4200
class title: Managing Water Resources in a Changing World
description: The field of water resources management is an exciting showcase of the many challenges that await civil and environmental engineers. On one hand, increasing water demand from the urban, energy, and agricultural sectors are aggravating multi-sector conflicts. On the other hand, several drivers of change, such as global warming or socio-economic development, make future water demand and availability deeply uncertain. How can we reconcile these challenges? How can we plan and manage water resources systems in an integrated, sustainable, and just way? Building on the legacy of research in water resources systems, this course is designed to equip the new generation of professionals with the forma mentis and mathematical modelling tools that are needed to discover and negotiate the highly uncertain tradeoffs we face in balancing the water resources demands of the future.
outcome: Identify the actors and decision-makers of a water management problem., Describe the main components of a water system through mathematical models., Develop and evaluate optimization-based models for the planning and management of river basins., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or CS 1112 and CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700.

class: CEE 4210
class title: Renewable Energy Systems
description: The goal of this course is to survey renewable energy technologies and systems, primarily focusing on solar and wind as physically the largest renewable energy sources available to society, and considering hydropower, biomass, and geothermal energy as well.  The course explains calculations to support capacity, efficiency, and productivity of renewable energy.  Cost and economics of renewables are explored as well, along with the connection to U.S. and global climate and energy policy.  Homework assignments completed during the semester culminate in a renewable energy system design project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BEE 3310 or CEE 3310 or by permission of the instructor.

class: CEE 4215
class title: Stochastic Modeling of Complex Systems
description: The theory of stochastic processes is introduced through examples of complex systems from the natural and applied sciences, with an emphasis on applications rather than mathematical abstraction. Students will learn how to model dynamical systems with intrinsic and extrinsic noise sources, simulate their dynamics, and explore how the interplay between stochasticity and nonlinear dynamics can impact their behavior. Topics covered include generating processes for heavy-tailed distributions, diffusion processes (gaussian white noise), jump processes (white shot noise, birth/death processes, dichotomous Markov noise), stochastic hybrid systems, stochastic differential equations, first passage times, and noise-induced transitions. Analytical tools developed in the class include stochastic differential equations, the differential Chapman-Kolmogorov equation and its derivatives (Fokker-Planck and master equation), the use of transforms to solve master and Fokker-Planck equations, and the system size expansion to approximate solutions to master equations with nonlinear transition rates. Applications include examples from biophysics, climate, environmental sciences, and various areas of biology including systems, synthetic, molecular, and cellular biology.
outcome: Identify the sources of stochasticity in a variety of processes in the applied and natural sciences., Model complex stochastic processes using different types of stochastic processes including random walks, Lévy flights and hybrid stochastic processes., Determine and analyze the equation(s) describing the temporal evolution of probabilities and probability densities in continuous-state and discrete-state stochastic processes., Analyze the stationary probability distribution of a stochastic process (if it exists) and the temporal evolution of moments and cumulants., Understand the relationship between the Langevin and Fokker-Planck equations, and how to derive approximations to the solution of master equations with nonlinear transition rates via the system size expansion., Identify the fundamental processes that lead to noise-induced transitions and heavy-tailed distributions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930 or MATH 3230.

class: CEE 4510
class title: Microbiology for Environmental Engineering
description: Introduction to the fundamental aspects of microbiology and biochemistry that are pertinent to environmental engineering and science. Provides an overview of the characteristics of Bacteria, Archaea, unicellular Eukaryotes (protozoa, algae, fungi), and viruses. Includes discussions of cell structure, bioenergetics and metabolism, and microbial genetics. Focus is then applied to topics pertinent to environmental engineering: pathogens; disease and immunity; environmental influences on microorganisms; roles of microbes in the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles; enzymes; bioremediation, bioenergy, molecular microbiology; and microbial ecology.
outcome: Recognize, name and predict important properties of key classes of organic compounds pertinent to both environmental contamination and biomolecules., Comprehend the organization and behavior of different types of microbial cells., Understand the diversity of microbial physiological and biochemical reactions., Describe key features of the informational macromolecules (DNA,RNA, and protein) and modern techniques for analyzing them in environmentally-relevant contexts., Make quantitative estimates of the impact of microbes on natural and engineered processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2090 and CHEM 1570, or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 4535
class title: Water Chemistry for Environmental Engineering
description: This course covers chemical principles relevant to the understanding, design, and control of chemical processes in natural and engineered systems. Topics include chemical thermodynamics, acid-base equilibria, mineral precipitation/dissolution, trace element speciation, redox reactions, and reactions at the solid-solution interface. This course focuses on the mathematical description of chemical equilibria and the development of numerical, graphical, and computational solutions to these problems. Students will learn to use chemical equilibrium modeling software to describe and predict chemical speciation in complex waters. Applications of aquatic chemical principles to topics including lead in drinking water systems, arsenic mobility in agricultural soils, and geologic CO2 sequestration are discussed.
outcome: Formulate systems of equations to describe aquatic chemical systems using engineering and chemistry principles including mass balance and chemical equilibrium concepts., Quantify chemical parameters in aquatic systems using numerical, graphical, and computational solution methods., Implement chemical equilibrium modeling of complex aquatic systems using Visual Minteq software., Communicate applications of chemical equilibrium modeling techniques to real-world aquatic systems in writing and through graphical representations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2090 or equivalent for undergraduates.

class: CEE 4555
class title: Physical and Chemical Process
description: This course focuses on the theoretical and engineering aspects of physical and chemical phenomena and processes applicable to the removal of impurities from water, wastewater, and industrial wastes. The first unit covers general chemical engineering principles relevant in environmental processes including mass balances, reactor models, and reaction kinetics. The second unit covers chemical processes involving dissolved species including gas transfer, adsorption, and oxidation-reduction processes. The third unit covers particle processes and the conventional theories behind particle destabilization, particle flocculation, and particle removal processes. Each topic area has a corresponding problem set that provides students with opportunities to apply the fundamentals discussed in class. The fundamental theory is coupled with a number of real-world examples that provide context for the more abstract principles that are introduced
outcome: Recognize critical water quality regulations., Recognize the advantages/disadvantages of conventional and advanced options for removal of dissolved and particulate contaminants., Formulate a qualitative understanding of the fundamental theory upon which individual treatment process design is based., Master the quantitative skills necessary to model and design individual processes and integrated wastewater and drinking water treatment systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3510.

class: CEE 4570
class title: Environmental Biological Processes
description: Principles and application of microbiology and biotechnology with emphasis on biological processes in environmental engineering applications. Theoretical and engineering aspects of biological phenomena and processes applicable to the removal of impurities from water, wastewater, and industrial wastes and to their transformation in the environment. Microbiology fundamentals, bioenergetics analysis, stoichiometry, biokinetics, and design of biological treatment processes for pollutants removal, bioremediation and resources recovery. Topics include cell metabolism, cell nutrition and growth, energy transfer and utilization, aerobic and anaerobic microbial metabolism, biological wastewater process theory and modeling, biological nutrients removal, bioremediation and resources recovery.
outcome: Apply the biochemical and microbial principles for CEE-relevant environmental biological processes design., Analyze stoichiometry, bioenergetics involved in environmental biological processes., Design complex biological processes for targeted outcome and goals., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3510 or permission of instructor. 

class: CEE 4640
class title: Sustainable Transportation Systems Design
description: Senior-level design course in transportation, with a focus on design of sustainable transportation systems. The perspective in the course is one of "system design", i.e., understanding the process of creating objectives, developing alternative designs and having models capable of representing the interactions among major elements of the overall system. We will also adopt a "sustainable development" or "triple bottom line" perspective, taking into account ecological and social as well as economic dimensions of transportation systems design. From this perspective, efficient transportation function achieves the economic objective, while quantifying and minimizing negative impacts addresses ecological and social goals. The interactions among the major system elements (vehicles, infrastructure, people, freight) occurs on networks, and we need to focus on how networks function. We will also study how resources are allocated and how capacity is maintained in networks. Systems design is examined from both a public sector perspective and from a private sector perspective.
outcome: Develop the student's ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science and basic transportation engineering in a design context., Design transportation systems to meet desired objectives., Develop the students' ability to see their solutions in a social context., Understand current issues related to design of effective transportation systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700 and CEE 3610 or by permission of the instructor.

class: CEE 4665
class title: Modeling and Optimization for Smart Infrastructure Systems
description: Course provide students with a set of quantitative tools for systematic decision making in the context of civil infrastructure systems. The goal is to enable students to develop models and solution strategies based on a "systems perspective,"" which is necessary for intelligent planning and management of largescale infrastructure systems. A major focus of the course will be to motivate the study of quantitative tools that are used for planning and managing these systems via application oriented programming assignments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 or equivalent, ability to program in Matlab or Python.

class: CEE 4745
class title: Sustainability and Automation: The Future of Construction Industry
description: The construction industry is currently facing many challenges with respect to shortage of skilled workers, greenhouse gas emissions, and use of non-sustainable construction materials with high embodied carbon. Robotic construction enables efficient use of materials, reduction of waste generated and the ability to fabricate complex, multi-scale structures. In this course students will learn the principles of designing new structural elements with reduced embodied carbon. The course will introduce sustainable construction materials and the challenges associated with material variability and quality on building design. Students will learn the differences between standard construction techniques and advances enabled through automation. Students will reimagine and design complex, yet efficient member shapes and connections. They will evaluate the performance of these newly designed members using structural modeling and laboratory techniques.
outcome: Analyze 3D printed structural elements using modeling software and evaluate their performance in the lab., Identify sources of embodied carbon in structures and introduce ways to reduce them., Learn to control a robot and use the robot to perform tasks., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3710 or graduate standing.

class: CEE 4760
class title: Behavior and Design of Concrete and Masonry Structures
description: This introductory course will discuss concrete and masonry as materials of construction and their incorporation into structural components and systems. The course will focus on fundamental behavior of reinforced concrete and masonry members and systems and explore how they are analyzed and designed.  The course will cover their behavior under in-plane and out plane loading, their performance under environmental conditions, and other topics.  The course is project focused with the students preparing a complete and detailed design deliverable.
outcome: Recognize concrete and masonry as structural materials; their limitations, strengths, and applications., Apply engineering principles to the behavior and analysis of concrete and masonry., Recognize the variability of environmental loading and uncertainty in strength prediction., Recognize the limit states of concrete and masonry and their impact on performance of structures in service conditions., Demonstrate the application of structural engineering design within the context of a semester long design project., Explore concrete masonry and their applications on Cornell's Ithaca campus., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3710 or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 4800
class title: Engineering Smart Cities
description: This course prepares students to tackle the technical challenges to designing and operating smart and dynamic infrastructure systems.  In particular, students will learn to combine data and models to control overall system performance in the face of uncertainty.  The class will focus on smart city infrastructure systems that are self-aware, with continual surveillance of the built and natural environment and an autonomous capacity to control resource allocation.  This course will build upon fundamental engineering principles (for systems such as transportation, energy, and water resources) and teach students to employ emerging sensor technologies, accompanying data analytics, resource demand forecasting, and model predictive control theory.  Students will learn to couple engineering models of infrastructure with data-driven probabilistic models of resource demand and the approaches to control these integrated hybrid systems for optimal and equitable resource allocation with improved resilience to exogenous disturbances. Finally, the class will explore cases studies in urban flooding, energy supply, transportation and air quality, and water supply.
outcome: Apply data-driven models to forecast resource demand for infrastructure applications., Apply model predictive control principles to smart infrastructure systems., Critically evaluate the security, overall performance, and equity of resource allocation for smart infrastructure systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940.

class: CEE 4930
class title: Data Analytics
description: Big data is transforming organizations enabling vast improvements in operating efficiency, market identification and segmentation, and many other domains. This course focuses on data collection at all scales, the transformation of that data into knowledge using a variety of data analytic techniques, and the integration of that knowledge into system models for decision-making to better manage organizations. Expertise in R will be developed throughout this course.
outcome: Develop an ability to manage, analyze, and interpret data., Improve the students' ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering management problems., Develop the skills and techniques necessary to become an effective problem solver., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3230 and CEE 3040, or equivalent.

class: CEE 5025
class title: Civil and Environmental Engineering Seminar for First-Year Research Students
description: We will invite our CEE faculty to host presentations related to topics they feel open to discussing. Examples may include: how to have a successful PhD and pitfalls to avoid, the academic and industry job markets, academic writing and presenting, how to select research topics, topics currently popular in research and who certain key players / universities / companies are, grants fellowships and scholarships, postdocs, effective teaching, the differences between being an academic in different types of schools and departments, work-life balance, etc.
outcome: Introduce research graduate students to campus resources that will serve them throughout their degree program, the culture of their home-department, and the greater University., Contextualize of research concentrations and faculty affiliations with the field of Civil and Environmental Engineering., Demonstrate competence in proactive leadership communication skills., Provide tools and support to students that will help conduct sustainable research progress within the PhD program. These tools will hopefully be application to care., 

class: CEE 5031
class title: Project in Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology
description: Project-based course in the area of environmental fluid mechanics and hydrology under the guidance of a faculty member.

class: CEE 5041
class title: Project in Geotechnical Engineering
description: Design of major geotechnical engineering project. Planning and preliminary design during fall semester; final design completed in January intersession.

class: CEE 5051
class title: Project in Environmental Engineering
description: Design project related to Environmental Engineering.

class: CEE 5061
class title: Project in Transportation Engineering
description: Systems analysis of a substantial transportation service.

class: CEE 5101
class title: Introduction to Python for Engineering
description: Python is one the most popular programming languages for machine learning and data science in various engineering fields. This course rapidly introduces students to programming in Python, focusing on practical tools for data analysis, visualization, and scientific computing. We will learn to work with data, create visualizations, and write simple functions and scripts. We will install and use libraries such as NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas, and create and manage virtual environments. Basic computer science and software engineering concepts will be introduced, however, the focus of this short course is on learning to use Python as a computational tool for engineering and data analysis problems, and creating a foundation for continued learning.
outcome: Install and set up Python and additional computational libraries., Be fluent in the use of expressions, variables, functions, conditional statements, and loops., Use Python to load, analyze, and visualize data., Set up and use virtual environments such as Anaconda to install and manage packages and other tools, for project portability and collaboration., 

class: CEE 5200
class title: Economics of the Energy Transition
description: In response to the risks posed by global climate change, many states and countries have set emissions reductions goals necessitating a rapid transition toward zero-carbon energy resources. Achieving these goals entails unprecedented investment in civil infrastructure systems combined with large-scale consumer and industry adoption of clean energy solutions. This course will explore the economic challenges and opportunities associated with this transition, with an emphasis on the electric power sector. The course is broken into two halves. The first focuses on the economic viability of individual projects. The second develops system level models and considers interactions between competing energy sources.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700, CEE 3230 or ENMGT 5940.

class: CEE 5240
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: enrollment in group-based project with strong system design component approved by course instructor.  

class: CEE 5510
class title: Microbiology for Environmental Engineering
description: Introduction to the fundamental aspects of microbiology and biochemistry that are pertinent to environmental engineering and science. Provides an overview of the characteristics of Bacteria, Archaea, unicellular Eukaryotes (protozoa, algae, fungi), and viruses. Includes discussions of cell structure, bioenergetics and metabolism, and microbial genetics. Focus is then applied to topics pertinent to environmental engineering: pathogens; disease and immunity; environmental influences on microorganisms; roles of microbes in the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles; enzymes; bioremediation, bioenergy, molecular microbiology; and microbial ecology.
outcome: Recognize, name and predict important properties of key classes of organic compounds pertinent to both environmental contamination and biomolecules., Comprehend the organization and behavior of different types of microbial cells., Understand the diversity of microbial physiological and biochemical reactions., Describe key features of the informational macromolecules (DNA,RNA, and protein) and modern techniques for analyzing them in environmentally-relevant contexts., Make quantitative estimates of the impact of microbes on natural and engineered processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2090 and CHEM 1570, or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 5665
class title: Modeling and Optimization for Smart Infrastructure Systems
description: Course provide students with a set of quantitative tools for systematic decision making in the context of civil infrastructure systems. The goal is to enable students to develop models and solution strategies based on a "systems perspective,"" which is necessary for intelligent planning and management of largescale infrastructure systems. A major focus of the course will be to motivate the study of quantitative tools that are used for planning and managing these systems via application oriented programming assignments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 or equivalent, ability to program in Matlab or Python.

class: CEE 5735
class title: Mathematical Modeling of Natural and Engineered Systems
description: This course builds from previously studied fundamental concepts to uncover strategies for using math to describe natural and engineered systems that impact the human experience (e.g. infrastructure systems, subsurface structures and networks, bacterial colonies, traffic networks, reservoir systems, etc.) Specifically, selected approaches for mechanistic descriptions ("clear box" models), data-driven descriptions ("black box" models), and hybrids of these ("grey box" models) will be covered: both through an introduction to foundational theory and also in computational implementation. In gaining experience in formulating their own mathematical models for real world phenomena, students will be better able to describe, study, and control the performance of natural and engineered systems in their professional lives.

class: CEE 5746
class title: Sustainability and Automation: The Future of Construction Industry
description: The construction industry is currently facing many challenges with respect to shortage of skilled workers, greenhouse gas emissions, and use of non-sustainable construction materials with high embodied carbon. Robotic construction enables efficient use of materials, reduction of waste generated and the ability to fabricate complex, multi-scale structures. In this course students will learn the principles of designing new structural elements with reduced embodied carbon. The course will introduce sustainable construction materials and the challenges associated with material variability and quality on building design. Students will learn the differences between standard construction techniques and advances enabled through automation. Students will reimagine and design complex, yet efficient member shapes and connections. They will evaluate the performance of these newly designed members using structural modeling and laboratory techniques.
outcome: Analyze 3D printed structural elements using modeling software and evaluate their performance in the lab., Identify sources of embodied carbon in structures and introduce ways to reduce them., Learn to control a robot and use the robot to perform tasks., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3710 and CEE 3080 or graduate standing.

class: CEE 5760
class title: Behavior and Design of Concrete and Masonry Structures
description: This introductory course will discuss concrete and masonry as materials of construction and their incorporation into structural components and systems.  The course will focus on fundamental behavior of reinforced concrete and masonry members and systems and explore how they are analyzed and designed.  The course will cover their behavior under in-plane and out plane loading, their performance under environmental conditions, and other topics.  The course is project focused with the students preparing a complete and detailed design deliverable.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3710 or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 5770
class title: Intermediate Behavior of Concrete and Metal Structures
description: Building off the introductory courses in these topics which focused on the fundamental behavior of structural members, this class will explore the behavior, interaction, and limit states of more complex metal and concrete structures. The behavior of concrete and steel structures as systems will be the focus, covering frame behavior, composite floor systems, trusses, stability, vibration, and other advanced topics. The course will conclude with analyzing, designing, and detailing the transfer of load through the structures and its components.
outcome: Understand principles of structural system behavior in concrete & metal structures and apply them in analysis & design., Analyze how loads are transferred through the structural system and identify the most critical components., Identify key considerations of constructible, resilient and serviceable structures, and formulate appropriate solutions to address these considerations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 4740 or CEE 4760 or by permission of the instructor. 

class: CEE 5790
class title: Introduction to Building Information Modeling (BIM) using Revit
description: The purpose of this course is to provide a general knowledge of the use of Revit to document and model all of the major architectural elements of a commercial project. You will learn the design and detailing aspects of commercial buildings including floor plans, interior and exterior elevations, wall and building sections, schedules, and construction drawing set. Lab assignments will be created utilizing Revit (latest version).
outcome: Students will have a basic knowledge of considerations involved in the preliminary design of small commercial buildings., Students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create a three-dimensional building model., Students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create construction drawings for a commercial building, including architectural floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, sections, and elevations. Graduate students will be able to use the college's architectural BIM system to create structural framing plans., Students will be able to develop an architectural design and create a set of construction documents for a small commercial building, included in the set are architectural floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, sections, and elevations. Graduate students will be required to create foundation and structural framing plans., Students will be able to present the proposed design to the class, with oral explanations., 

class: CEE 5820
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and one India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability, climate change, and economic development in the US and these two countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers., 

class: CEE 5900
class title: Project Management
description: Core graduate course in project management for people who will manage technical or engineering projects. Focuses both on the "technical" tools of project management (e.g., methods for planning, scheduling, and control) and the "human" side (e.g., forming a project team, managing performance, resolving conflicts), with somewhat greater emphasis on the latter.

class: CEE 5910
class title: Engineering Management Project
description: As Engineering Managers, you need to embrace both technical and business skills to tackle complex, sociotechnical challenges, while staying on top of the current pace of technological change. In this Engineering Management project course, we are bridging from your coursework to your role as an engineering manager. To get there, you will practice the tools, themes, and techniques learned in your Engineering Management coursework through the scaffolding of a large project. In CEE 5910, you will work in teams to lead and execute a project in collaboration with an industry partner. You will perform an intensive evaluation of some mixture of the technological and management aspects of a major engineering project or system, conducted with a team of students.

class: CEE 5930
class title: Data Analytics
description: Big data is transforming organizations enabling vast improvements in operating efficiency, market identification and segmentation, and many other domains. This course focuses on data collection at all scales, the transformation of that data into knowledge using a variety of data analytic techniques, and the integration of that knowledge into system models for decision-making to better manage organizations. Expertise in R will be developed throughout this course.
outcome: Develop an ability to manage, analyze, and interpret data., Improve the students' ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering management problems., Develop the skills and techniques necessary to become an effective problem solver., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or equivalent.

class: CEE 5950
class title: Construction Planning and Operations
description: Prepares students for responsibilities in overseeing the engineering and management of construction; on time-on budget. Emphasis is placed on the management processes for organizing, planning, and controlling the activities of complex development and construction programs. Students study the contracts for engineering, architecture, and construction; focusing on cost estimation and schedule control, responsibilities and risks, and the relationships among owners, designers, contractors, and suppliers. The potential for project disruption is discussed with special emphasis on dispute resolution methods.
outcome: Evaluate the client's conceptual design providing broad, yet accurate cost appraisals., Have a thorough understanding of the interactions and relationships among the participants within the construction process., Prepare a comprehensive construction cost estimate for a complex building, including general construction, and specialty contractors.  Develop an understanding of how this estimate is developed and carried forward into the bidding and cost control processes., Develop a project schedule from this cost estimate to determine the overall project duration and critical path., Confidentially advise a project owner of project delivery options in an ethical and effective manner., 

class: CEE 5980
class title: Decision Framing and Analytics
description: Framework to structure the way we think about decision situations that are complicated by uncertainty, complexity, and competing objectives. Specific decision analysis concepts and tools, such as decision trees, sensitivity analysis, value of information, and utility theory. Applications to all areas of engineering and life. Includes a group project to analyze a real-world decision.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses: CEE 3040, ENGRD 2700, ILRST 2100, BTRY 3010, AEM 2100, or equivalent.

class: CEE 6015
class title: Special Topics: Remote Sensing
description: Students may elect to undertake a project in remote sensing. The work is supervised by a professor in this subject area.

class: CEE 6020
class title: Seminar - Water Resources and Environmental Engineering
description: Graduate students and faculty members give informal lectures on various topics related to ongoing research in environmental engineering or water resources.

class: CEE 6035
class title: Special Topics in Hydraulics
description: Special topics in fluid mechanics, hydraulic engineering, or hydrology.

class: CEE 6045
class title: Special Topics in Geotechnical Engineering
description: Supervised study of special topics not covered in the formal courses.

class: CEE 6055
class title: Special Topics in Environmental Engineering
description: Supervised study in special topics not covered in formal courses.

class: CEE 6065
class title: Special Topics in Transportation
description: Advanced subject matter not covered in depth in other regular courses.

class: CEE 6070
class title: Seminar - Civil Infrastructure
description: Presents topics of current interest.

class: CEE 6075
class title: Special Topics in Structural Engineering
description: Study of topics in structural engineering that are more specialized or different from other courses. Special topics depend on faculty and student interests.

class: CEE 6095
class title: Special Topics in Engineering Management
description: Individually supervised study of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.

class: CEE 6200
class title: Managing Water Resources in a Changing World
description: The field of water resources management is an exciting showcase of the many challenges that await civil and environmental engineers. On one hand, increasing water demand from the urban, energy, and agricultural sectors are aggravating multi-sector conflicts. On the other hand, several drivers of change, such as global warming or socio-economic development, make future water demand and availability deeply uncertain. How can we reconcile these challenges? How can we plan and manage water resources systems in an integrated, sustainable, and just way? Building on the legacy of research in water resources systems, this course is designed to equip the new generation of professionals with the forma mentis and mathematical modelling tools that are needed to discover and negotiate the highly uncertain tradeoffs we face in balancing the water resources demands of the future.

class: CEE 6210
class title: Renewable Energy Systems
description: The goal of this course is to survey renewable energy technologies and systems, primarily focusing on solar and wind as physically the largest renewable energy sources available to society, and considering hydropower, biomass, and geothermal energy as well.  The course explains calculations to support capacity, efficiency, and productivity of renewable energy.  Cost and economics of renewables are explored as well, along with the connection to U.S. and global climate and energy policy.  Homework assignments completed during the semester culminate in an individual renewable energy research project in line with the student's interests.
outcome: Identify and evaluate different types of renewable energy resources available in nature., Analyze renewable energy conversion devices for technical, economic, and ecological performance., Demonstrate an understanding of the connection between ecological/social policy objectives and the deployment of renewable energy to meet human needs and improve quality of life., 

class: CEE 6215
class title: Stochastic Modeling of Complex Systems
description: The theory of stochastic processes is introduced through examples of complex systems from the natural and applied sciences, with an emphasis on applications rather than mathematical abstraction. Students will learn how to model dynamical systems with intrinsic and extrinsic noise sources, simulate their dynamics, and explore how the interplay between stochasticity and nonlinear dynamics can impact their behavior. Topics covered include generating processes for heavy-tailed distributions, diffusion processes (gaussian white noise), jump processes (white shot noise, birth/death processes, dichotomous Markov noise), stochastic hybrid systems, stochastic differential equations, first passage times, and noise-induced transitions. Analytical tools developed in the class include stochastic differential equations, the differential Chapman-Kolmogorov equation and its derivatives (Fokker-Planck and master equation), the use of transforms to solve master and Fokker-Planck equations, and the system size expansion to approximate solutions to master equations with nonlinear transition rates. Applications include examples from biophysics, climate, environmental sciences, and various areas of biology including systems, synthetic, molecular, and cellular biology.
outcome: Identify the sources of stochasticity in a variety of processes in the applied and natural sciences., Model complex stochastic processes using different types of stochastic processes including random walks, Lévy flights and hybrid stochastic processes., Determine and analyze the equation(s) describing the temporal evolution of probabilities and probability densities in continuous-state and discrete-state stochastic processes, Analyze the stationary probability distribution of a stochastic process (if it exists) and the temporal evolution of moments and cumulants., Understand the relationship between the Langevin and Fokker-Planck equations, and how to derive approximations to the solution of master equations with nonlinear transition rates via the system size expansion., Identify the fundamental processes that lead to noise-induced transitions and heavy-tailed distributions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930 or MATH 3230.

class: CEE 6300
class title: Spectral Methods for Incompressible Fluid Flows
description: An introduction to the fundamental building blocks of flow solvers for the simulation of incompressible flow processes in the natural environment. High-order accuracy element-based spatial discretization methods (spectral element and discontinuous Galerkin) are covered along with high-accuracy time-advancement methods. Initially applied to fundamental linear problems, these methods are then implemented in the context of the Burgers equation with a focus on aliasing effects and spectral filtering. The course concludes with a presentation of the fundamentals of non-hydrostatic environmental flow modeling.

class: CEE 6530
class title: Water Chemistry for Environmental Engineering
description: Covers principles of chemistry applicable to the understanding, design, and control of water and wastewater treatment processes and to reactions in receiving waters. Topics include chemical thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, acid-base equilibria, mineral precipitation/dissolution, and electrochemistry. Focuses on the mathematical description of chemical reactions relevant to engineered processes and natural systems, and the numerical or graphical solution of these problems.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduates need one semester of college chemistry or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 6560
class title: Physical and Chemical Process
description: This course focuses on the theoretical and engineering aspects of physical and chemical phenomena and processes applicable to the removal of impurities from water, wastewater, and industrial wastes. The first unit covers general chemical engineering principles relevant in environmental processes including mass balances, reactor models, and reaction kinetics. The second unit covers chemical processes involving dissolved species including gas transfer, adsorption, and oxidation-reduction processes. The third unit covers particle processes and the conventional theories behind particle destabilization, particle flocculation, and particle removal processes. Each topic area has a corresponding problem set that provides students with opportunities to apply the fundamentals discussed in class. The fundamental theory is coupled with a number of real-world examples that provide context for the more abstract principles that are introduced.
outcome: Recognize critical water quality regulations., Recognize the advantages/disadvantages of conventional and advanced options for removal of dissolved and particulate contaminants., Formulate a qualitative understanding of the fundamental theory upon which individual treatment process design is based., Master the quantitative skills necessary to model and design individual processes and integrated wastewater and drinking water treatment systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3510 for undergraduates or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 6570
class title: Environmental Biological Processes
description: Principles and application of microbiology and biotechnology with emphasis on biological processes in environmental engineering applications. Theoretical and engineering aspects of biological phenomena and processes applicable to the removal of impurities from water, wastewater, and industrial wastes and to their transformation in the environment. Microbiology fundamentals, bioenergetics analysis, stoichiometry, biokinetics, and design of biological treatment processes for pollutants removal, bioremediation and resources recovery. Topics include cell metabolism, cell nutrition and growth, energy transfer and utilization, aerobic and anaerobic microbial metabolism, biological wastewater process theory and modeling, biological nutrients removal, bioremediation and resources recovery.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3510 or permission of instructor.

class: CEE 6648
class title: Sustainable Transportation Systems Design
description: Graduate-level design course in transportation, with a focus on design of sustainable transportation systems. The perspective in the course is one of "system design", i.e., understanding the process of creating objectives, developing alternative designs and having models capable of representing the interactions among major elements of the overall system. We will also adopt a "sustainable development" or "triple bottom line" perspective, taking into account ecological and social as well as economic dimensions of transportation systems design. From this perspective, efficient transportation function achieves the economic objective, while quantifying and minimizing negative impacts addresses ecological and social goals. The interactions among the major system elements (vehicles, infrastructure, people, freight) occurs on networks, and we need to focus on how networks function. We will also study how resources are allocated and how capacity is maintained in networks. Systems design is examined from both a public sector perspective and from a private sector perspective.

class: CEE 6690
class title: Information Design for Strategic Decision-Making
description: The course covers the basic models and solution approaches in problems that involve interactions among strategic agents distilling the key results in mechanism design theory. Over the last seventy years, the theory of mechanism design was developed as an approach to efficiently align the individuals' and system's interests in problems where individuals have private preferences. It can be viewed as the art of designing information and protocols to achieve a desired outcome. Mechanism design has broad applications spanning many fields, including transportation routing, smart grid, communication networks, social media, online advertising, and resource allocation problems. The objective of this course is to gain a sound understanding of the science behind the use of mechanism design in solving modern problems that involve strategic interactions among agents. The course will provide a unified treatment of the subject, suitable for a broad engineering audience.
outcome: Formulate a mechanism design problem, identify the set of outcomes, and define the social choice function., Identify whether a direct or indirect mechanism is appropriate to use for a given problem., Implement a social choice function using different solution concepts, e.g., dominant strategy implementation, Bayesian Nash implementation, etc., Solve resource allocation problems using mechanism design., 

class: CEE 6736
class title: Mathematical Modeling of Natural and Engineered Systems
description: This course builds from previously studied fundamental concepts to uncover strategies for using math to describe natural and engineered systems that impact the human experience (e.g. infrastructure systems, subsurface structures and networks, bacterial colonies, traffic networks, reservoir systems, etc.) Specifically, selected approaches for mechanistic descriptions ("clear box" models), data-driven descriptions ("black box" models), and hybrids of these ("grey box" models) will be covered: both through an introduction to foundational theory and also in computational implementation. In gaining experience in formulating their own mathematical models for real world phenomena, students will be better able to describe, study, and control the performance of natural and engineered systems in their professional lives.

class: CEE 6790
class title: Time Series Data Analysis for Civil, Mechanical and Geophysical Applications
description: Data acquired as time series are increasingly common in age of GPS, smart phones, and wireless data transfer. This course will cover data processing tools and techniques that allow us to efficiently manipulate and better understand the data and the physical world that they sample. Course topics include Fourier transforms, convolution, filtering, data acquisition, noise, linear systems, and AutoRegressive Moving Average (ARMA) models. Topics are covered both from theoretical (continuous, analog signals) and practical (discrete-time digital signals) viewpoints. More advanced topics will emphasize the analysis of transient and non-stationary time series such as earthquake ground motions, structural or environmental response to extreme events, and other signals related to engineering and earth science disciplines.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 or equivalent.

class: CEE 6800
class title: Engineering Smart Cities
description: This course prepares students to tackle the technical challenges to designing and operating smart and dynamic infrastructure systems.  In particular, students will learn to combine data and models to control overall system performance in the face of uncertainty.  The class will focus on smart city infrastructure systems that are self-aware, with continual surveillance of the built and natural environment and an autonomous capacity to control resource allocation.  This course will build upon fundamental engineering principles (for systems such as transportation, energy, and water resources) and teach students to employ emerging sensor technologies, accompanying data analytics, resource demand forecasting, and model predictive control theory.  Students will learn to couple engineering models of infrastructure with data-driven probabilistic models of resource demand and the approaches to control these integrated hybrid systems for optimal and equitable resource allocation with improved resilience to exogenous disturbances. Finally, the class will explore cases studies in urban flooding, energy supply, transportation and air quality, and water supply.
outcome: Apply data-driven models to forecast resource demand for infrastructure applications., Apply model predictive control principles to smart infrastructure systems., Critically evaluate the security, overall performance, and equity of resource allocation for smart infrastructure systems., Identify open research and development needs in the engineering of smart cities., Propose promising approaches to closing the existing R&D gaps., 

class: CEE 6910
class title: Project Management
description: Core graduate course in project management for people who will manage technical or engineering projects. Focuses both on the "technical" tools of project management (e.g., methods for planning, scheduling, and control) and the "human" side (e.g., forming a project team, managing performance, resolving conflicts), with somewhat greater emphasis on the latter.

class: CEE 6940
class title: Research in Engineering Management
description: The student may select an area of investigation in engineering management. Results should be submitted to the instructor in charge in the form of a research report.

class: CEE 7010
class title: Research - Remote Sensing
description: For students who want to study one particular area in depth. The work may take the form of laboratory investigation, field study, theoretical analysis, or development of design procedures.

class: CEE 7020
class title: Environmental and Water Resources Systems Analysis Research
description: Investigations of particular environmental or water resources systems problems.

class: CEE 7030
class title: Research in Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology
description: The student may select an area of investigation in fluid mechanics, hydraulic engineering, or hydrology. The work may be either experimental or theoretical in nature. Results should be submitted to the instructor in charge in the form of a research report.

class: CEE 7040
class title: Research in Geotechnical Engineering
description: For students who want to pursue a particular geotechnical topic in considerable depth.

class: CEE 7050
class title: Research in Environmental Engineering
description: For students who want to study a particular area in depth. The work may take the form of laboratory investigation, field study, theoretical analysis, or development of design and analysis procedures.

class: CEE 7070
class title: Research in Structural Engineering
description: Pursues a branch of structural engineering beyond what is covered in regular courses. Theoretical or experimental investigation of suitable problems.

class: CEE 7073
class title: Civil and Environmental Engineering Materials Project
description: Individual projects or reading and study assignments involving engineering materials.

class: CEE 8100
class title: Thesis - Remote Sensing
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8200
class title: Thesis - Environmental and Water Resource Systems
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8300
class title: Thesis - Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8400
class title: Thesis - Geotechnical Engineering
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8500
class title: Thesis - Environmental Engineering
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8600
class title: Thesis - Transportation Systems Engineering
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8700
class title: Thesis - Structural Engineering
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CEE 8800
class title: Thesis - Civil Infrastructure Systems
description: The student selects a thesis research topic with the advice of the faculty member in charge and pursues it either independently or in conjunction with others working on the same topic.

class: CHEM 1007
class title: Academic Support for CHEM 2070
description: CHEM 1007 reviews material presented in CHEM 2070 lectures and also provides problem-solving strategies and practice during the discussion sections.

class: CHEM 1057
class title: Academic Support for CHEM 3570
description: Reviews material presented in CHEM 3570 lectures and offers practice with CHEM 3570 material. Weekly reviews and problem solving sessions focus on the most important topics covered in lecture, and office hours held throughout the week by Learning Strategies Center tutors to help improve performance in CHEM 3570.

class: CHEM 1150
class title: The Language of Chemistry
description: Fundamentals of chemistry will be introduced and applied to real world situations. Critical aspects of 21st century life depend on an informed voting public that can assiduously address scientific issues. The role of chemistry, the good and the bad, will be an increasingly important component of everyday life. The course seeks to prepare you to be an informed voter.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: CHEM 1560
class title: Introduction to General Chemistry
description: A one-semester introduction to fundamental topics in general chemistry, both qualitative and quantitative, with laboratory. CHEM 1560 prepares students for CHEM 1570; CHEM 1560 is not recommended for premedical or preveterinary students. Students planning to take CHEM 2080 should be enrolled in CHEM 2070 rather than CHEM 1560.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: CHEM 1729
class title: Solve It!
description: Solve It! will teach the skill of solving cognitively challenging general chemistry questions, such as students receive in CHEM 2070. Students will explore Polya's method of problem solving while solving problems on unit conversions, combustion analysis, limiting reactants, isotopes, the Bohr model, periodic trends, 3-D Lewis structures, atomic orbitals, molecular orbitals, ideal gases, and the kinetic theory of gases. In addition, students will learn fundametal arithmetic and mathematical skills.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: CHEM 2070
class title: General Chemistry I
description: Covers fundamental chemical principles, with considerable attention given to the quantitative aspects and techniques important for further work in chemistry. Main topics include chemical transformations and equations, periodic trends of the elements, electronic structure of atoms, chemical bonding, and the collective behavior of molecules.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: CHEM 2080
class title: General Chemistry II
description: Covers fundamental chemical principles, including reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and equilibrium. These principles are presented quantitatively and explored in the laboratory. Considerable attention is given to the quantitative calculations and techniques important for further work in chemistry.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090.

class: CHEM 2090
class title: Engineering General Chemistry
description: Covers basic chemical concepts, such as reactivity and bonding of molecules, introductory quantum mechanics, and intermolecular forces in liquids and solids and gases. Attention will be focused on aspects and applications of chemistry most pertinent to engineering.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high school chemistry or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 2150
class title: Honors General and Inorganic Chemistry
description: Intensive systematic study of the laws and concepts of chemistry, with considerable emphasis on quantitative aspects. CHEM 2150 covers electronic structure of atoms, chemical bonding, thermodynamics, kinetics, and equilibrium. This course serves as an accelerated entry into organic chemistry in the Spring semester for students with a strong background in chemistry. Laboratory work covers qualitative and quantitative analysis, thermodynamics, kinetics transition metal chemistry, and spectroscopic techniques.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: calculus course at level of MATH 1110, or MATH 1910 for students who have not taken high school calculus, or permission of the instructor.

class: CHEM 2510
class title: Introduction to Experimental Organic Chemistry
description: Introduction to the synthesis, separation, characterization, and handling of materials, including chromatography, extraction, crystallization, infrared spectroscopy, and others. An experiment is performed the first week of lab. Students need to enroll in the course Canvas site and complete the appropriate pre-lab assignments outlined on that site before coming to the first lab.
distribution categories: (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: at least one of the following courses: CHEM 1570, CHEM 3530, CHEM 3570, or CHEM 3590.

class: CHEM 2770
class title: Methods in Chemical Education I
description: CHEM 2770 is the first teaching methods companion class to CHEM 2070 and CHEM 2080. CHEM 2770 students will co-lead weekly 2-hour review sessions; meet in 2-hour group meetings to develop and refine teaching materials; attend a 1-hour discussion class on a current STEM pedagogical theory; and assess teaching progress for 1-hour (all activities on a weekly basis).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 and CHEM 2080.

class: CHEM 2780
class title: Methods in Chemical Education II
description: CHEM 2780 is the second teaching methods companion class to CHEM 2070 and CHEM 2080. CHEM 2780 students will co-lead weekly 2-hour review sessions; meet in 2-hour group meetings to develop and refine teaching materials; attend a 1-hour discussion class on a current STEM pedagogical theory; and assess teaching progress for 1-hour (all activities on a weekly basis).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 and CHEM 2080.

class: CHEM 3020
class title: Honors Experimental Chemistry II
description: Chemical and instrumental methods of analysis, including fluorescence spectroscopy, electrochemistry, UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and gas chromatography. Error analysis, experiment design, and data analysis using Jupyter notebooks.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SDS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: CHEM 3570
class title: Organic Chemistry for the Life Sciences
description: Study of the important classes of carbon compounds-including those encountered in the biological sciences. The course emphasizes their three-dimensional structures, mechanisms of their characteristic reactions, their synthesis, methods of identifying them, and their role in modern science and technology.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2080 or advanced placement, or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 3580
class title: Organic Chemistry for the Life Sciences
description: The course emphasizes the important classes of organic compounds, with particular emphasis on their three-dimensional structures, mechanisms of their characteristic reactions, their synthesis, methods for their identification, and their applications in modern technology and medicine.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3570 or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 3600
class title: Honors Organic Chemistry II
description: Rigorous and systematic study of organic chemistry with a focus on molecules that have biological applications. The course emphasizes a mechanistic understanding of organic reactions and applies this knowledge toward complex systems such as amino acids and carbohydrates.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3590 or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 3870
class title: Principles of Physical Chemistry
description: Survey of the fundamental principles of physical chemistry, The course covers thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, enzyme kinetics, and the electronic structure of atoms and molecules. CHEM 3870 satisfies the minimum requirement for physical chemistry for the chemistry major.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2080, MATH 1110 and MATH 1120, and PHYS 2208, or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 3890
class title: Honors Physical Chemistry I
description: CHEM 3890-CHEM 3900 is a year-long sequence covering key topics in physical chemistry. CHEM 3890 introduces the use of mathematics and physics to investigate chemical systems. The fundamental principles of quantum mechanics are introduced and applied to understanding the structure and spectra of atoms and molecules. Specific topics include exact and approximate solutions to the Schrödinger equation, angular momentum, bonding and molecules, and spectroscopy. CHEM 3900 follows with an introduction to the behavior of ensembles of quantum particles (statistical mechanics), the laws of thermodynamics, and kinetic theory.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2208 and CHEM 2080, or MATH 2310 or MATH 2220, or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 4210
class title: Introduction to Inorganic Chemistry Research
description: Research in inorganic chemistry involving both laboratory and library work, planned in consultation with a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3030 and CHEM 3890-CHEM 3900 or CHEM 3870-CHEM 3880 and CHEM 2900 with average of B- or better, or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 4330
class title: Introduction to Analytical Chemistry Research
description: Research in analytical chemistry involving both laboratory and library work, planned in consultation with a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3030 and CHEM 3900 with average of B- or better or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 4430
class title: Introduction to Chemical Biology Research
description: Research in chemical biology involving both laboratory and library work, planned in consultation with a faculty member.

class: CHEM 4500
class title: Principles of Chemical Biology
description: This course provides an introduction to both the fundamental biochemistry of living systems, including the structure and synthesis of biological macromolecules, and modern approaches that combine organic chemistry with emerging techniques from the chemical and life sciences to interrogate biological systems.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3570-CHEM 3580, or CHEM 3590-CHEM 3600 or equivalent.

class: CHEM 4610
class title: Introduction to Organic Chemistry Research
description: Research in organic chemistry involving both laboratory and library work, planned in consultation with a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3020 and CHEM 3580 or CHEM 3600 with grade of B- or better or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 4770
class title: Introduction to Physical Chemistry Research
description: Research in physical chemistry involving both laboratory and library work, planned in consultation with a faculty member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3900 with average of B- or better or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 5110
class title: Chemical Facilities Boot Camp
description: Discussion of and demonstration of facilities relevant to modern chemical research.

class: CHEM 5120
class title: Capstone Research Project
description: Supervision of Capstone Research Project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 5110.

class: CHEM 6050
class title: Advanced Inorganic Chemistry I: Symmetry, Structure, and Reactivity
description: A group theoretical analysis of bonding in main group compounds will be followed by a survey of modern coordination chemistry, including rudimentary spectroscopy and magnetism, and inorganic reaction mechanisms.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3890-CHEM 3900, CHEM 4100 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 6291
class title: Electrochemistry of Energy Materials
description: Electrochemistry is involved with electrified interfaces and the interaction/interconversion of chemical and electrical energy. This course focuses on the fundamentals of interfacial phenomena including electrode kinetics, electron transfer theory, the electrical double layer, mass transport, and diffusion processes. The course will cover a broad range of electrochemical methods to advance our understanding of structure-property relationships of energy materials. The course will also include selected current topics including: (1) Advanced renewable energy conversion and storage technologies, such as CO2 reduction, H2 production, lithium batteries, and solar cells. (2) Introduction to the state-of-the-art development of analytical methods including electron microscopy and X-ray methods. (3) Electrochemistry with interdisciplinary overlap with solid-state chemistry and materials science, such as photoelectrochemistry, organic electrochemistry, and bioelectrochemistry.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: physical chemistry (CHEM 3870 or 3890/ 3900) or equivalent.

class: CHEM 6450
class title: Principles of Chemical Biology
description: This course provides an introduction to both the fundamental biochemistry of living systems, including the structure and synthesis of biological macromolecules, and modern approaches that combine organic chemistry with emerging techniques from the chemical and life sciences to interrogate biological systems.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3570-CHEM 3580 or CHEM 3590-CHEM 3600 or equivalent.

class: CHEM 6660
class title: Synthetic Organic Chemistry
description: Modern techniques and strategies of organic synthesis including catalysis, radical chemistry, photochemistry, and electrochemistry, application of organic reaction mechanisms and retrosynthetic analysis to the problems encountered in rational multistep synthesis, with particular emphasis on modern development in synthesis design.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 6650 or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 6700
class title: Fundamental Principles of Polymer Chemistry
description: Emphasizes general concepts and fundamental principles of polymer chemistry.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3580 or CHEM 3600, or permission of instructor.

class: CHEM 6860
class title: Physical Chemistry of Proteins
description: Physical studies of proteins, with emphasis on using single molecule methodologies and on studies of metalloproteins. Topics include: Physical/chemical concepts that include chemical structure and conformation of proteins, protein folding energy landscape, electron transfer theory, enzyme catalysis, chemical kinetics, and single-molecule kinetics. Experimental methodologies that include absorption and emission spectroscopy, fluorescence energy resonance transfer, confocal microscopy, total internal reflection fluorescence, single molecule spectroscopy, time correlated single photon counting, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, optical tweezers, magnetic tweezers, super-resolution imaging with optical microscopy. Protein structure and function that includes metalloprotein structure/function (bioinorganic chemistry), GFP and variants, protein labeling, motor proteins, protein-protein interactions, protein-DNA interactions, and live-cell imaging.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3880 or CHEM 3900, or equivalents.

class: CHEM 6890
class title: Honors Physical Chemistry I
description: CHEM 6890-CHEM 6900 is a year-long sequence covering key topics in physical chemistry. CHEM 6890 introduces the use of mathematics and physics to investigate chemical systems. The fundamental principles of quantum mechanics are introduced and applied to understanding the structure and spectra of atoms and molecules. Specific topics include exact and approximate solutions to the Schrödinger equation, angular momentum, bonding and molecules, and spectroscopy.

class: CHEM 7910
class title: Advanced Spectroscopy
description: The chief aim of this course is to provide an understanding of how the tools of modern spectroscopy can be applied to unravel the structural and dynamical properties of molecular systems, with a focus on optical techniques. The course will briefly cover the theoretical basis of light-matter interactions and factors governing the vibrational and electronic spectra of diatomic and polyatomic molecules. The main portion of the course will address current topics in spectroscopic research with a survey of different techniques and the theory behind them. By the end of the course, students will be equipped to understand and interpret the results of a wide array of steady-state and optical spectroscopic techniques applied to complex molecules.

class: CHEM 7930
class title: Quantum Mechanics I
description: A modern introduction to quantum mechanics (QM). Topics will include: the quantum state vector, the probabilistic interpretation of QM, the mathematical language of QM, angular momentum, QM in the continuum, solutions to the Schrödinger equation for simple 1D applications, the coulomb potential and the hydrogen-atom, independent particles, the variational approach, and time-independent perturbation theory.

class: CHEM 7960
class title: Statistical Mechanics
description: Introduces the fundamentals of statistical mechanics: ensembles, distributions, averages, and fluctuations, building to the treatment of systems of interacting molecules. Topics from equilibrium statistical mechanics include structure and thermodynamics of molecular liquids, critical phenomena, and computational statistical mechanics. Topics from nonequilibrium statistical mechanics include spectroscopy, chemical kinetics, transport, and the microscopic origins of irreversibility.

class: CHEME 2000
class title: Effective and Inclusive Leadership in Engineering
description: An in-depth learning of the social skills and methods required to be an effective and inclusive leader of a diverse team. Emphasis on the role that the intersection between ethics, effective communication, mentorship, and intercultural competence play in leadership. Case studies in chemical engineering will illustrate and practice these skills.
outcome: Demonstrate effective communication skills under the EACH framework (empowerment, accountability, courage, humility)., Analyze different decision-making scenarios under an ethical perspective., Demonstrate intercultural awareness and competence when leading a diverse team., Be able to adapt a mentoring strategy under different circumstances., 

class: CHEME 2880
class title: Biomolecular Engineering: Fundamentals and Applications
description: An introduction to modern biology including aspects of biochemistry and molecular and cellular biology intended for students with no significant background in this area. An emphasis on practical applications of this knowledge in a variety of settings including the production of industrial enzymes, pharmaceuticals, and biologics.
outcome: Course project built experience working with teams and communicating effectively., Lectures on pharmaceutical research and development and clinical trials introduced concepts of professional and societal ethics., Course quizzes, project and final exam applied knowledge of mathematics, biology and engineering., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930. Corequisite: ENGRD 2190.

class: CHEME 3130
class title: Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
description: Studies the first and second laws and their consequences for chemical systems. Covers thermodynamic properties of pure fluids, solids, and mixtures; phase and chemical reaction equilibrium; heat effects in batch and flow processes; and power cycles and refrigeration.
outcome: Apply fundamental concepts of thermodynamics to engineering applications., Work as a team to analyze and design a thermodynamic system (e.g. power generator) and communicate results in a written report., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 2200.

class: CHEME 3240
class title: Heat and Mass Transfer
description: Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer. Macroscopic and microscopic balances. Applications to problems involving conduction, convection, and diffusion.
outcome: Learn to formulate and solve mathematical models that capture the primary processes governing heat and mass transfer in simple physical settings., Design heat exchangers and heat transfer equipment., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3230.

class: CHEME 4320
class title: Chemical Engineering Laboratory
description: Laboratory experiments in fluid dynamics, heat transfer, mass transfer, separations, process control, and other unit operations fundamental to large-scale chemical processing. Data collection, analysis, and interpretation. Technical report writing. Process design and scale-up based on pilot-plant data.
outcome: Design experiments and choose operating conditions to acquire data for solving a stated technical problem., Operate pilot-plant equipment and collect data accurately and safely., Use rigorous statistical methods, e.g. linear regression analysis and propagation of errors, to identify sources of uncertainty in measured variables and in parameters derived from curve-fits., Prepare graphs, data tables, and process flowcharts for concise, unambiguous presentation of results., Use results of small-scale, pilot-plant experiments for preliminary design of large-scale process equipment., Write laboratory reports that use graphs, data tables, process flowcharts, and equations to describe the methodology and present the results of data collection, data analysis, and process design., Work in four-person teams throughout., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3230, CHEME 3240, CHEME 3320, CHEME 3720 and CHEME 3900.

class: CHEME 4800
class title: Principles of Computational Thinking for Engineers
description: Engineering practice increasingly relies on computational tools and data analysis approaches. The course introduces computational thinking into engineering analysis. Integrates data science and statistics, linear algebra, artificial intelligence, and mathematical modeling approaches into the context of contemporary problems in the design and analysis of processes, products, and systems. Focuses on paradigms, not syntax. Use of the Julia programming language and its associated toolchain to transition from idea to implementation. In addition, cloud computing resources for course materials, assignments, and projects. Weekly labs provide guided hands-on practice. Course assignments use data sets and examples from industrial practice to develop fluency and understanding of real-life problems.
outcome: Analyze process and product data sets using tools from data science/statistics, and machine learning (ML)., Identify and test quantitative models of process and product performance using real-time dynamic and static data sets., Demonstrate mastery of quantitative decision-making and risk management approaches in the context of a process, product, or system design., 

class: CHEME 4840
class title: Microchemical and Microfluidic Systems
description: Principles of chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport phenomena applied to microchemical and microfluidic systems. Applications in distributed chemical production, portable power, micromixing, separations, and chemical and biological sensing and analysis. Fabrication approaches (contrasted with microelectronics), transport phenomena at small dimensions, modeling challenges, system integration, case studies.
outcome: Students learn about the use of a variety of fabrication techniques used for both microelectronics and microchemical systems.  In a number of cases the fabrication techniques involve chemical processes, and the students apply their knowledge in transport phenomena, thermodynamics and kinetics to model these processes.  In addition, microchemical systems involve virtually every unit operation conducted in traditional macro chemical processing., Students complete all problem sets in groups of 2 people.  The final exam is an oral presentation (Power Point, typically) that is also done in groups of 2 people, although individual presentations are permitted.  Students are given the opportunity to select the topic of their final presentation.  Often, this involves the selection of a topic that is of current interest, such as ink jets, micro-total analytical systems, miniature fuel cells, etc.  Since the presentation must be centered around patents and intellectual property, the topics selected are clearly of industrial and practical interest., Students conduct a laboratory experiment involving fabrication of a number of micromixers, followed by characterization of these devices.  The experiment is done in teams, and a laboratory report is required., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3900 or permission of instructor.

class: CHEME 4880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability,climate change, and economic development in the US, China, India, and other countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers ., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: CHEME 4900
class title: Undergraduate Projects in Chemical Engineering
description: Research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering.

class: CHEME 4998
class title: International Research Internship
description: Research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering for visiting international students.

class: CHEME 5020
class title: Immersive Professional Development for Chemical Engineering M. Eng.
description: The development of professional skills and their application to a project-based working environment for students in the Master of Engineering (M.Eng.) program in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering.  Students will focus on developing their management, communication and presentation skills, project management skills, networking, innovative mindset, early phase market interpretation as it applies to new products/processes, self-awareness, working as a team and managing conflict. A focus on basic finance skills which enable scientists and engineers to make quantitative financial decisions in corporate and wealth management contexts. The material from this course can be applied to traditional economic and engineering fields while simultaneously providing a core set of tools for students interested in entrepreneurship or opportunities in the financial and consulting industries.
outcome: Apply fundamental project management principles to a team based design project., Apply core career management skills related to resumes, interviewing, personal pitch, networking., Apply and demonstrate effective technical communication skills in written and presentation formats., Identity, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and finance., Apply key leadership and team based skills related to communication, accountability, and conflict resolution., 

class: CHEME 5310
class title: Principles of Electrochemical Engineering
description: With the growing focus on renewable energy and electrification of transport for climate control, electrochemical engineering will play an increasingly critical role in enabling such a paradigm shift. This course introduces fundamentals of electrochemical conversion and storage including an introduction on electrochemical cells, characteristics of electrochemical reactions and Faraday's law as well as basic principles on cell potential and thermodynamics, electrochemical kinetics, and ionic mass transport. Students will also learn about standard electroanalytical techniques and applications of electrochemical engineering with particular focus on batteries. In addition to lecture-style classes, the course will engage the students in critical reading, presentation, and discussion of relevant research publications in energy storage systems providing them a holistic view of the current state of the field.
outcome: Demonstrate understanding of the fundamental concepts of electrochemical cell potential and thermodynamics, kinetics and transport., Demonstrate understanding of basic electroanalytical techniques., Analyze and interpret electrochemical cell data., Demonstrate critical paper reading and presentation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3130, CHEME 3900, and CHEME 3240 or equivalent.

class: CHEME 5320
class title: Glass: Structure, Properties and Modern Applications
description: Course develops a foundational understanding of the glassy state and nature of the glass transition. Introduces phenomenology, chemistry and structure of key oxide glass families, with an emphasis on silicate glasses and the interaction of oxide components. Recent advances in glass relaxation and the implications of the statistical nature of glass structure are also discussed. Contemporary and emerging applications in optical communication, displays, and electronics packaging are explored within the context of key optical, mechanical and thermal properties.  Students will gain an understanding of modern glass theory, familiarity with glass technology, and practical know-how of a glass "power user".
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2060, MSE 3030. Corequisite: MSE 3040 or equivalent background.

class: CHEME 5430
class title: Bioprocess Engineering
description: Discusses principles involved in using biomolecules (e.g., antibodies, enzymes, DNA) and living organisms (e.g., bacteria, yeast, tissue cultures) for engineering biological processes.  Examples will be taken from the following application areas: biopharmaceuticals, biofuels, biomedical technologies, foods, and environmental processes.
outcome: Learn and reinforce fundamental biology principles and how to apply them to engineering problems., Build mathematical models of cell growth, metabolism and bioreactor operation., Learn current methods in biotechnology from critically reading current literature and orally answering questions in class based on reading material., Design a biological product as well as a process for its production and manufacturing (team-based design project)., Gain experience with working in teams. (d) Gain experience giving formal oral presentations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3900 or permission of instructor.

class: CHEME 5610
class title: Concepts of Chemical Engineering Product Design
description: Chemical products range from specialty chemicals, biologic based products, to electromechanical devices that perform chemical transformations. This course integrates the steps of chemical product design from brainstorming and concept selection through design and manufacturing while recognizing the overlap with Lean operating principles. Students will be taught house of quality, robust design, failure modes and effects analysis. Other topics include multi-generational product planning, FMEA, sustainability and product life-cycle analysis, basic economic evaluations, process mapping, cycle time content and balance, lead-time assessment and management, quality performance analysis and remediation, entrepreneurship and new business development, as well as patents, and intellectual property.  Case studies will illustrate concepts.
outcome: Identify and analyze potential market segments in support of a new product design and commercialization., Prioritize customer requirements and relate requirements to product engineering characteristics using the house of quality approach., Demonstrate DOE and Taguchi methods (also known as Robust Design) to improve product quality in the earliest stages of product design., Demonstrate failure modes and effects analysis on a new product design., Analyze and project financial performance for a new commercialized product., 

class: CHEME 5650
class title: Design Project
description: Design study and economic evaluation of a chemical processing facility, alternative methods of manufacture, raw-material preparation, food processing, waste disposal, or some other aspect of chemical processing.

class: CHEME 5651
class title: M. Eng. Design Project Studio
description: Studio design team work sessions for the Master of Engineering chemical process project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CHEME 5650.

class: CHEME 5660
class title: Financial Data, Markets, and Mayhem for Scientists and Engineers
description: A quantitative finance course that enables scientists and engineers to make quantitative financial decisions in corporate and wealth management contexts. We'll use tools from engineering, statistics, artificial intelligence (AI), data science (DS), and machine learning (ML) to model, analyze, and ultimately optimize financial systems and financial decision-making. The material from this course can be applied to traditional economic and engineering fields while simultaneously providing a core set of tools for students interested in entrepreneurship or opportunities in the financial and consulting industries. Course assignments will be completed using LaTeX.
outcome: Analyze financial data sets using tools from artificial intelligence (AI), data science (DS), and machine learning (ML)., Identify quantitative models of asset pricing and process performance using real-time and static financial data sets., Demonstrate mastery of quantitative decision-making and risk management approaches in the context of corporate finance and personal wealth management., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of programming languages, such as Python, Matlab, Julia and mathematical and computing topics, such as probability, statistics, optimization, and data science tools, such as Jupyter notebooks, DataFrames, etc.

class: CHEME 5730
class title: Interdisciplinary Design Concepts
description: This course emphasizes entrepreneurial driven technology designs (forward engineering) by integrating mechanical, chemical, and materials engineering through the understanding of early stage product development complexities. These complexities include staging invention and innovation via the critical selection of materials, assessing product mechanics and processes for final product function, performance, reliability, cost and technical marketability. Students will attend lectures, participate in establishing a Tech Startup integrated into the Johnson School MBA mentoring program, attend startup design reviews, give a series of individual/group presentations, and write a startup issue paper.

class: CHEME 5770
class title: Principles in Process and Lean Engineering
description: Introduces essential process engineering and lean tools used by leading companies to improve the design and performance of new and existing processes. Clearly defined problem statements with stakeholders, targeted data analysis, and effective implementation of solutions will be discussed. The following tools and principles, with a Lean philosophy overlay, will be covered:  process mapping, data collection and analysis, standard operating setpoints, audits, training, change control, experiment planning, materials and tooling control, measurement and calibration systems, maintenance management, gap analysis, cycle time content and balance, lead-time assessment and management, quality performance analysis and remediation, sustainable control measures, demand/takt time analysis and relation to demonstrated equipment/process capacity, and process stability assessment. Six sigma tools will also be introduced. Effective use of these tools enables engineers to drive towards consistent process capability and improved cycle time, quality, lead time, and cost.
outcome: Apply fundamental process performance assessment principles such as constraint analysis and apply consistent, data driven thinking related to process/business improvement., Apply core lean and process engineering tools, terminology, and principles to modern day manufacturing., Apply and demonstrate the practical principles around process problem solving and optimization., Using relevant process data, identify and remediate process constraints and install  key performance indicators (KPIs) for sustainability., 

class: CHEME 5800
class title: Principles of Computational Thinking for Engineers
description: Engineering practice increasingly relies on computational tools and data analysis approaches. The course introduces computational thinking into engineering analysis. Integrates data science and statistics, linear algebra, artificial intelligence, and mathematical modeling approaches into the context of contemporary problems in the design and analysis of processes, products, and systems. Focuses on paradigms, not syntax. Use of the Julia programming language and its associated toolchain to transition from idea to implementation. In addition, cloud computing resources for course materials, assignments, and projects. Weekly labs provide guided hands-on practice. Course assignments use data sets and examples from industrial practice to develop fluency and understanding of real-life problems.
outcome: Demonstrate mastery of basic software engineering paradigms, data structures, common programming idioms, and algorithms., Analyze scientific, engineering, and financial data sets using tools from data science/statistics and machine learning (ML)., Identify and test quantitative models of process and product performance using real-time dynamic and static data sets, Demonstrate mastery of quantitative decision-making and risk management approaches in the context of a process, product, or system design., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or CS 1112 or equivalent.

class: CHEME 5870
class title: Energy Seminar I
description: Energy Seminars will explore energy-related topics of emerging, contemporary and historical interest. An abbreviated list of subjects explored in the seminars includes: global energy resources, energy generation technologies (present and future), energy storage options, environmental impacts and climate change mitigation, energy policy, and energy delivery economics and systems. Seminar speakers will be distinguished practicing engineers and executives from industry and government as well as faculty members from several departments at Cornell, and other academic institutions. Students from any department in Engineering or the Physical Sciences should find these talks informative.

class: CHEME 5990
class title: Medical and Industrial Biotechnology Seminar
description: Students attend seminars of their selection and write one-page summaries. Eligible seminars include all listings that are related to medical and industrial biotechnology.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: medical and industrial biotechnology trainees.

class: CHEME 5999
class title: Special Projects in Chemical Engineering
description: Nonthesis research or studies on special problems in chemical engineering.

class: CHEME 6110
class title: Mathematical Methods of Chemical Engineering Analysis
description: Techniques covered include mathematical modeling, scaling, dimensional analysis, regular and singular perturbations, multiple scales, asymptotic analysis, stability analysis, linear and nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations, numerical methods for initial and boundary value problems, finite Fourier transform method, and introduction to finite element analysis.

class: CHEME 6130
class title: Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
description: Molecular thermodynamics of gases, lattices, and liquids, including special applications to problems in chemical engineering.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 3890-CHEM 3900, CHEME 3130 or equivalent.

class: CHEME 6230
class title: Transport Phenomena for Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
description: Builds foundational knowledge of transport phenomena to provide conceptional and mathematical tools to address research topics in chemical and biomolecular engineering. Significant use will be made of primary literature from biological, materials, energy, and sustainability contexts to motivate and illustrate concepts.
outcome: Analyze transport phenomena physically and mathematically., Develop the ability to design research approaches and analyze experimental data., Interpret and use concepts related to transport phenomena from primary research literature., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910, MATH 1920, MATH 2930, MATH 2940, CHEME 3230 and CHEME 3240 or equivalent.

class: CHEME 6310
class title: Engineering Principles for Drug Delivery
description: Application of engineering design principles to problems in drug formulation and delivery. Specific topics include traditional drug formulation, mechanisms and kinetics of pharmaceutical stability, stimuli-sensitive systems, controlled-release devices, prodrugs, targeted drug delivery, transdermal drug delivery, biomaterials, and gene therapy. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: background in organic and polymer chemistry or permission of instructor.

class: CHEME 6440
class title: Aerosols and Colloids
description: Dynamics of micro-and nano-particles, which contain many molecules but are small enough that molecular effects are important. Topics include: the formation and growth of particles; their transport, theological and phase behaviors; and their role in technologies including paints, foods, health-care products, drug delivery, composite materials and air pollution control.

class: CHEME 6660
class title: Analysis of Sustainable Energy Systems
description: Quantitative methods of engineering and life cycle analysis for energy choices in a contemporary sustainability context. Fundamental principles of thermodynamics, transport, and reaction kinetics applied to representative energy supply and end use technologies. Topics include resource assessment, energy extraction/capture, conversion, distribution, storage, and consumption; environmental and economic consequences; local to global scales.
outcome: Quantify current energy supplies and demands. Learn and appreciate the importance of geopolitical/social context in sustainability analysis., Develop advanced skills for engineering analysis, including process thermodynamics, 2nd-law/availability analysis, transient heat conduction, and economics., Minimize energy consumption or maximize energy production in processes, e.g., heat-to-work in Rankine cycles, heat and work inputs for chemical conversions, work inputs for refrigeration., Assess and compare options for sustainable energy recovery from our natural environment, including geothermal, bio, and solar energy., Complete a comprehensive design project, working in teams of typically two students each, that involves both oral and written communication of results., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 3130, ENGRD 2210/MAE 2210, MSE 3030 or equivalent recommended.

class: CHEME 6661
class title: Bioenergy and Biofuels Module
description: Energy technology module of CHEME 6660 will introduce students to issues and challenges in utilizing biomass feedstocks to produce bioenergy, biofuels and/or other products. The focus will be on converting biomass feedstocks to bioenergy using a variety of thermochemical processes. Case study material will include biomass feedstock cultivation and harvesting, processing and conversion technologies, co-products, and environmental and economic impacts over their full life cycle. The course will culminate in a final project in which students will use Life Cycle Assessment to measure the energetic viability and environmental performance.

class: CHEME 6670
class title: Fossil Fuels Module
description: Energy technology module of CHEME 6660 covering fossil fuels.

class: CHEME 6671
class title: Nuclear Energy Module
description: Energy technology module of CHEME 6660 will provide a description of the operation of nuclear fission power plants in their several manifestations and the fuel cycle associated with them. Their benefits and reasons why they are cause for concern will be described. Topics will include the principles of reactor operation and control, reactor safety features (natural and engineered), normal and abnormal operation, spent fuel safety and nuclear waste disposal, etc. Advanced reactors now runder construction and to be constructed in the near and more distant future will be discussed.

class: CHEME 6681
class title: Energy Analysis Project
description: Capstone energy analysis project covering a topic of interest. Relevant background information will be provided in CHEME 6660: Analysis of Sustainable Energy Systems - course lectures as well as from the other energy modules offered. Specific projects should include, to the extent possible, a quantitative discussion of resource assessment, energy extraction/capture, conversion, distribution, storage, and consumption; environmental and economic consequences spanning local to global scales.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEME 6660.

class: CHEME 6780
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and one India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability, climate change, and economic development in the US and these two countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers., 

class: CHEME 6800
class title: Computational Optimization
description: Systems optimization modeling, computation, and applications. Includes theory and algorithms of linear, nonlinear, mixed-integer linear, mixed-integer nonlinear, and deterministic global optimization, as well as stochastic programming, robust optimization and optimization methods for big-data analytics. Real-world applications of large-scale computational optimization in process manufacturing, bioengineering, energy systems, and sustainability.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2220 and MATH 2940 or equivalents.

class: CHEME 6920
class title: Principles and Practices of Graduate Research
description: A colloquium/discussion group series for first-year graduate students. Topics include the culture and responsibilities of graduate research and the professional community; the mechanics of conducting research (experimental design, data analysis, serendipity in research, avoiding self-deception), documenting research (lab notebooks, computer files) and reporting research (writing a technical paper and oral presentations).

class: CHEME 7700
class title: Chemical Engineering Graduate Research Seminar
description: Chemical Engineering graduate students in their third year and above must present an annual seminar on their research. Provides training in public presentation and dissemination of scientific data. Constructive feedback on the quality of the presentation and research will be submitted by attendees.
outcome: Define a problem and propose a solution., Demonstrate command of literature, prior work and identify the impact of the proposed research., Demonstrate critical thinking, explain the intellectual merit and broader impacts of the research project., 

class: CHEME 7900
class title: Chemical Engineering Seminar
description: General chemical engineering seminar.

class: CHIN 1101
class title: Beginning Mandarin I
description: For complete beginners only, providing a thorough grounding in conversational and reading skills. Students with any previous background or training in the language will need to take the Mandarin Placement Test to determine which Chinese course will best suit their needs.
 
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: CHIN 1109
class title: Beginning Chinese Reading and Writing for Students of Chinese Heritage I
description: Intended primarily for students whose family language is Mandarin but who have had little or no formal training. The focus is on reading, writing and speaking, as well as culture, and current events in the Chinese speaking community.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: CHIN 1121
class title: Beginning Mandarin for Professional Students I
description: This course helps students develop basic skills in Mandarin Chinese, at a moderate pace.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: CHIN 1123
class title: Beginning Mandarin for Professional Students III
description: A continuation of CHIN 1122 .  This course helps students develop basic skills in Mandarin Chinese, at a moderate pace. For non-heritage learners only. 
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B- in CHIN 1122, or permission of instructor.

class: CHIN 2201
class title: Intermediate Mandarin I
description: Continuing instruction in written and spoken Chinese with particular emphasis on consolidating basic conversational skills and improving reading confidence and ability.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 1102 with grade of B- or above, or equivalent as determined through placement exam and permission of instructor.

class: CHIN 2209
class title: Intermediate Chinese Reading and Writing for Students of Chinese Heritage I
description: This course focuses on reading and writing Chinese at the intermediate level for Chinese heritage students who grew up speaking Chinese with family members . Students will read authentic texts written by iconic Chinese figures such as Xu Dishan and Hu Shih (a Cornell alumnus, class of 1914), and practice writing while exploring various aspects of Chinese culture. Students will exit the course with a book of their own in Chinese as the course project documenting their learning during the semester. This course helps students further solidify their foundation for Chinese study at the next level as well as enhance their awareness of and overall competence in cross-cultural communication. If you grew up hearing and speaking Chinese and have very limited reading and writing proficiency, but have a goal of becoming a true bilingual of English and Chinese, this course is designed with you in mind.
 
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a grade of B in CHIN 1110 or equivalent as determined through placement test.

class: CHIN 3301
class title: High Intermediate Mandarin I
description: Continuing instruction in spoken and written Mandarin Chinese via text and authentic multimedia materials. 
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B+ or higher in CHIN 2202, or equivalent as determined through placement exam.

class: CHIN 3341
class title: High Intermediate Mandarin I: CAPS in D.C.
description: Continuing instruction in spoken Chinese and in various genres and styles of written Chinese.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 2202 or equivalent.

class: CHIN 3351
class title: High Intermediate Mandarin I: CAPS in Beijing
description: Continuing instruction in spoken Chinese and in various genres and styles of written Chinese.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 2202 or equivalent.

class: CHIN 4411
class title: Advanced Mandarin I
description: Reading, discussion, and composition at advanced levels.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B+ or higher in CHIN 3302, or equivalent as determined through placement exam.

class: CHIN 4427
class title: High Advanced Mandarin I
description: This advanced course aims to further develop the four communication skills in Chinese: speaking, listening, reading, and writing, through learning materials and activities on various topics related to China Studies, including authentic Chinese texts and TV programs, class discussions on various issues, and compositions.  Students can also expect to broaden their knowledge of Chinese culture and society through this course.  Classical Chinese will be introduced in this class to help students further understand written/formal Chinese as well as Chinese culture.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 2210 or CHIN 4412 with a grade of B+ or above, or equivalent as determined by instructor.

class: CHIN 4441
class title: Advanced Mandarin I: CAPS in D.C.
description: Reading, discussion, and composition at advanced levels.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 3302 or equivalent.

class: CHIN 4443
class title: High Advanced Mandarin I: CAPS in D.C.
description: This course is designed for students who have satisfactorily finished CHIN 4427 or the equivalent.  The focus of the course is on formal Chinese, and the main aim of this course is to help students achieve an advanced level of Chinese performance, so that they may combine Chinese with their work in their majors.  The course material will be formal Chinese writings by native speakers, mostly for native speakers, related to students' majors and fields of interest.  In addition, classical Chinese will also be introduced through readings as a means to enhance students' understanding of the language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 2210  or CHIN 4412 with a grade of B+ or above or equivalent as determined by instructor.

class: CHIN 4451
class title: Advanced Mandarin I: CAPS in Beijing
description: Reading, discussion, and composition at advanced levels.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 3302 or equivalent.

class: CHIN 4453
class title: High Advanced Mandarin I: CAPS in Beijing
description: This course is designed for students who have satisfactorily finished CHIN 2210 or CHIN 4412, or the equivalent. The focus of the course is on formal Chinese, and the main aim of this course is to help students achieve an advanced level of Chinese performance, so that they may combine Chinese with their work in their majors. The course material will be formal Chinese writings by native speakers, mostly for native speakers, related to students' majors and fields of interest. In addition, classical Chinese will also be introduced through readings as a means to enhance student's understanding of the language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHIN 2210 or CHIN 4412 or equivalent as determined by instructor.

class: CHIN 6616
class title: Mandarin Language Across the Curriculum (LAC)
description: This optional course aims to expand the students' vocabulary, and advance their speaking and reading skills as well as enhance their knowledge and deepen their cultural understanding by attaching to non-language courses throughout the university.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Two years (on heritage track) or four years of Chinese language learning (or equivalent).

class: CHLIT 4421
class title: Directed Study
description: Students choose a faculty member to oversee this independent study. The student and the faculty member work together to develop course content.

class: CHLIT 6621
class title: Advanced Directed Reading
description: Students choose a faculty member to oversee this independent study. The student and the faculty member work together to develop class readings.

class: CLASS 1331
class title: Elementary Sanskrit I
description: An introduction to the essentials of Sanskrit grammar. Designed to enable the student to read classical and epic Sanskrit as soon as possible.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: CLASS 1450
class title: Ancient Egyptian I: Introduction to Middle Egyptian Hieroglyphs
description: From ca. 2100 BC to the Roman era, hieroglyphs representing the Middle Egyptian language were inscribed on texts, objects and architecture. In this initial course students learn how the language was written and how it worked, including how words were written and how sentences were constructed with and without verbs. Along the way we will be reading short excerpts from Egyptian texts as part of the textbook's exercises, emphasizing grammar rather than textual or thematic analysis. The student who completes this and the second course that focuses on the verbal system will be well-equipped to pursue detailed study of Egyptian classics such as The Eloquent Peasant, Tale of Sinuhe, and Book of the Dead, as well as shorter inscriptions found on objects and monuments.

class: CLASS 1516
class title: FWS: Are You Not Entertained: Gladiators in Ancient and Modern Society
description: Gladiators executed stunning fight sequences, defied death, oozed sex appeal, stole wives (and husbands), and even, in the case of Spartacus, attacked the heart of the Roman empire. But who were the real gladiators? What was it like to be one? What does the popularity of gladiatorial fights tell us about Roman society and our world today? We will examine ancient literature, art, and archaeology like the Colosseum alongside The Hunger Games, Gladiator, and other modern media. We will compare that to evidence for gladiators' lived experiences, including their graffiti, curses, weapons, living quarters, tombs, and skeletons. Students will write a diagnostic essay, close reading essay, an interpretation of archaeological evidence, a historical argument, a research paper, and a pitch for modern media about gladiators.

class: CLASS 1531
class title: FWS: Greek Myth
description: This course will focus on the stories about the gods and heroes of the Greeks as they appear in ancient literature and art. We will examine the relationship between myths and the cultural, religious, and political conditions of the society in which they took shape. Beginning with theories of myth and proceeding to the analysis of individual stories and cycles, the material will serve as a vehicle for improving your written communication skills. Assignments include preparatory writing and essays focusing on readings and discussions in class.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: CLASS 1551
class title: FWS: Creativity and Crisis
description: In the Poetics, Aristotle asserts the most successful Greek tragedies elicited from their audiences both pity and fear, a two-fold experience of emotional release called "catharsis." Taking the philosopher's claim as a point of departure, this course explores how artistic practices comprised creative responses to disaster in the pre-modern Mediterranean. Reading and writing assignments address the restorative capabilities of a range of media, with an emphasis on the visual and performing arts. Acts of making, or even the destruction of artworks, facilitated psychological reactions to traumatic events, the civic commemoration of collective loss, and negotiations of private subjectivity in mourning. Such critical awareness of the emotional aesthetics of style, form, and content will inform the craft of our authorial voices.

class: CLASS 1553
class title: FWS: Art and Originality
description: What makes an original work of art authentic? Is a replica of a famous sculpture a derivative fake, or is the object valuable in its own right? Together we will examine themes of imitation, replication, illustration, and reinvention in the visual arts of the pre-modern Mediterranean. Representations executed in a variety of media, from paint to precious stones, will form the basis of writing assignments, designed to prompt reassessments of the educational models and creative canons operative in our own compositional techniques. Class readings, including selections from Plato, Aristotle, Vitruvius, and Pliny the Elder, will provide frameworks in which to approach ancient images within their historical context. Participants will organize an online art exhibition related to the politics of emulation in artistic practices of reproduction.

class: CLASS 1615
class title: Introduction to Ancient Rome
description: Ancient Rome was a village the size of Ithaca that grew into a world empire. In this course students will be introduced to some of its literature, art, and famous personalities in the classical period (2nd c. BCE – 2nd c. CE) and will read some of the greatest masterpieces of Latin literature. Special attention will be given to the late republic, Augustan, and Hadrianic periods, to Roman ethics, and to the rise of Christianity. No prior knowledge of the ancient world is necessary. All readings are in English.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 1702
class title: Great Discoveries in Greek and Roman Archaeology
description: This introductory course surveys the archaeology of the ancient Greek and Roman world. Each week, we will explore a different archaeological discovery that transformed scholars' understanding of the ancient world. From early excavations at sites such as Pompeii and Troy, to modern field projects across the Mediterranean, we will discover the rich cultures of ancient Greece and Rome while also exploring the history, methods, and major intellectual goals of archaeology.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CLASS 2000
class title: Environment and Sustainability Colloquium
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures given by experts, people with different expertise and perspectives who are addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., 

class: CLASS 2010
class title: Discussions of Environment and Sustainability
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures by experts with different perspectives addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern. The small group discussion session allows in-depth engagement with the art-science interface. Building on the possibilities shared by our expert visitors, students in the discussion section will develop their own approach to addressing environmental issues. We will analyze how the ways in which information is shared is as significant as the information itself, and consider "artistic" and "scientific" perspectives as mutually beneficial tools for exploring and communicating our relationship to the environment.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., Mobilize students' own backgrounds and developing expertise to produce a public-facing display that communicates environmental knowledge in creative ways., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 2351
class title: Intermediate Sanskrit I
description: Readings from simple Sanskrit poetry: the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CLASS 1332 or permission of instructor.

class: CLASS 2603
class title: Initiation to Greek Culture
description: In this course, we will read and discuss a wide range of ancient Greek literary and philosophical works as well as some modern critical and philosophical writings. We encourage active participation in small weekly seminar meetings and supplementary workshops with specially invited guests. Our focus throughout is on close analysis of the texts, and the attempts the Greeks made to grapple with the world around them through literature. The course inquires into the intellectual development of a culture infused with mythological accounts of the cosmos. It asks how poetic forms such as epic and tragedy engage with philosophical ideas while creating intense emotional effects on audiences both during antiquity and beyond. By the end of this course, students will have read a wide selection of Classical Greek literature and be able to perform close readings and comparative analysis of text and culture. In addition, students will hone their discussion and presentation skills in the seminar format, above all engaging with their peers in joint intellectual inquiry.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 2604
class title: Greek Mythology
description: The stories of Greek Mythology have ignited the imaginations of writers and artists from antiquity to the present day, from the tragedy of Achilles to the adventures of Percy Jackson. This course surveys the most influential stories of Gods and Heroes in Greek myths, focusing on their place in ancient Greek and Roman literature, society and religion, but also tracing their course in intellectual and art history through the Renaissance to the present day.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 2630
class title: Drinking through the Ages: Intoxicating Beverages in Near Eastern and World History
description: This course examines the production and exchange of wine, beer, coffee and tea, and the social and ideological dynamics involved in their consumption. We start in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, and end with tea and coffee in the Arab and Ottoman worlds. Archaeological and textual evidence will be used throughout to show the centrality of drinking in daily, ritual and political life.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CLASS 2661
class title: Greek and Roman Philosophy
description: An introductory survey of ancient Greek philosophy from the so-called Presocratics (6th century BCE) through the Hellenistic period (1st century BCE) with special emphasis on the thought of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, HST-AS) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: CLASS 2691
class title: Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics
description: An introduction to the phonology, morphology, and syntax of Proto-Indo-European and the chief historical developments of the daughter languages.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CLASS 2750
class title: Introduction to Humanities
description: These seminars offer an introduction to the humanities by exploring historical, cultural, social, and political themes. Students will explore themes in critical dialogue with a range of texts and media drawn from the arts, humanities, and/or humanistic social sciences. Guest speakers, including Cornell faculty and Society for the Humanities Fellows, will present from different disciplines and points of view. Students will make field trips to relevant local sites and visit Cornell special collections and archives. Students enrolled in these seminars will have the opportunity to participate in additional programming related to the annual focus theme of Cornell's Society for the Humanities and the Humanities Scholars Program for undergraduate humanities research.

class: CLASS 2806
class title: Roman Law
description: This course presents a cultural and historical perspective on ideas of agency, responsibility, and punishment through foundational texts of western law. We will primarily focus on three main areas of law: (1) slavery and (2) family (both governed by the Roman law of persons), and (3) civil wrongs (the law of delict or culpable harm). Through an examination of the legal sources (in translation) and the study of the reasoning of the Roman jurists, this course will examine the evolution of jurisprudence: the development of the laws concerning power over slaves and women, and changes in the laws concerning penalties for crimes. No specific prior knowledge needed.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CLASS 3391
class title: Independent Study in Sanskrit, Undergraduate Level
description: To be taken only in exceptional circumstances. Must be arranged by the student with his or her advisor and the faculty member who has agreed to direct the study. To be approved by the DUS.

class: CLASS 3395
class title: Advanced Sanskrit I
description: Selected readings in Sanskrit literary and philosophical texts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two years study of Sanskrit or equivalent.

class: CLASS 3635
class title: Queer Classics
description: This course engages classical antiquity and its reception through the prism of queer studies. Cruising Homer, Sappho, Euripides, Plato, Ovid and more, we will explore how queer theoretical frameworks help us account for premodern queer and trans bodies, desires, experiences, and aesthetics. We will trace how people historically have engaged with the classical past in political and affective projects of writing queer history and literature, constructing identities and communities, and imagining queer futures. We will unpack how classical scholarship might reproduce contemporary forms of homophobia and transphobia in its treatments of gender, sexuality, and embodiment in the classical past, and in turn how modern uses of the classical might reinforce or dismantle exclusionary narratives around 'queerness' today as it intersects with race, gender, sexuality, and class. Finally, we will consider how the work we are doing in this class (where the 'Queer' in 'Queer Classics' may be taken as an adjective or an imperative) relates to the ways that contemporary writers, activists, artists, and performers have animated the classical past with queer possibilities. All readings will be in translation; no knowledge of Latin and Greek is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 3676
class title: Ancient Political Thought
description: Ancient political debates about democracy, empire, and justice appear in late fifth-century BCE Athenian dramatic, historical, and philosophical literatures composed against the backdrop of the 27-year Peloponnesian War over the control of Greece (which Athens lost). Reading selected tragedies of Euripides, comedies of Aristophanes, and philosophical dialogues of Plato, in combination with the history of Thucydides, this course retraces, explores, and interrogates these texts' complex, provocative, and surprisingly relevant arguments for and against the pursuit of equality (democracy), security (war and imperialism), goodness (aretê from "excellence" to "virtue"), and fairness (justice), and their often unexpected results in practice. All the readings for this course are in English.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS)

class: CLASS 3686
class title: Independent Study in Classical Civilization, Undergraduate Level
description: May be taken upon completion of one semester of work at the 3000-level. To be taken only in exceptional circumstances. Must be arranged by the student with their advisor and the faculty member who has agreed to direct the study. To be approved by the DUS.

class: CLASS 3736
class title: The Archaeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 3750
class title: Introduction to Dendrochronology
description: Introduction and training in dendrochronology (tree-ring dating) and its applications in archaeology, art history, climate and environment through lab work and participation in ongoing research projects using ancient to modern wood samples from around the world. Supervised reading and laboratory/project work. Possibilities exists for summer fieldwork in the Mediterranean, Mexico, and New York State.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: CLASS 4662
class title: Topics in Ancient Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of topics in ancient philosophy. Topics vary by instructors.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, HST-AS) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in philosophy.

class: CLASS 4721
class title: Honors: Senior Essay I
description: See "Honors" under Classics front matter.

class: CLASS 4746
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: CLASS 6701
class title: Advanced Readings in Archaeology
description: Introduction to core readings in Greek and Roman art and archaeology. 

class: CLASS 6755
class title: Archaeological Dendrochronology
description: An introduction to the field of Dendrochronology and associated topics with an emphasis on their applications in the field of archaeology and related heritage-buildings fields. Course aimed at graduate level with a focus on critique of scholarship in the field and work on a project as part of the course.

class: CLASS 6766
class title: The Archeology of the City of Rome
description: This course tells the history of the Roman empire through the urban development of its capital from the early 1st millennium BCE to the advent of Christian emperors in the 4th century CE. What does the archeology reveal about how the geography and environment of this site, its society and political systems, military conquests, economy, infrastructure, resources, and technologies interacted to create the center of an empire? Special focus is on how the appropriation of other peoples and cultures shaped the metropolis itself. Did it manage to integrate individuals from Africa, the Near East, from North of the Alps and Britain, and if so, how? The history of excavations and the reception of the city's architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries will provide a critical lens for analyzing some of the master narratives associated with ancient Rome and its ruins.

class: CLASS 7173
class title: Topics in Ancient Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of topics in ancient philosophy. Topics vary by instructors. 

class: CLASS 7345
class title: Graduate TA Training
description: Pedagogical instruction and course coordination. Requirement for all graduate student teachers of LATIN 1201-LATIN 1202 and first-year writing seminars.

class: CLASS 7346
class title: Classics Graduate Preparation Seminar
description: A course to prepare Classics graduate students for exams and for professionalization.

class: CLASS 7691
class title: Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics
description: An introduction to the phonology, morphology, and syntax of Proto-Indo-European and the chief historical developments of the daughter languages.

class: CLASS 7746
class title: Greek and Roman Art and Archaeology
description: Topics Rotate. Fall 2024 topic: Funerary Culture in the Greco-Roman East. Tombs, grave goods, and funerary rituals are often thought to offer traces into the world of the living (the tomb as a house being a prominent metaphor), their concepts of the body, or their emotions. How, if at all, did such traditions change under imperial rule? Focusing on the Greek and Roman East means to zoom in to areas such as Greece, Anatolia, the Levant to the Middle East, or Egypt that feature century- if not millennia-old traditions which, if at all, transformed to different degrees under Roman rule. This seminar investigates opportunities and challenges of researching such constellations. Analysis of different traditions of scholarship that to this day shape our records will be critical, as well as discussion of scientific (and contested) methodologies of how to deal with human remains.

class: COGST 1101
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: COGST 1104
class title: WIM: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This section is highly recommended for students who are interested in learning about the topics covered in the main course through writing and discussion. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: COGST 1101.

class: COGST 1105
class title: Introduction to Linguistics
description: Overview of the science of language, especially its theoretical underpinnings, methods, and major findings. Areas covered include: the relation between sound and meaning in human languages, social variation in language, language change over time, universals of language, and the mental representation of linguistic knowledge. Students are introduced to a wide variety of language phenomena, drawn not only from languages resembling English, but also from many that appear to be quite unlike English, such as those native to the Americas, Africa, Asia, Australia, and the South Pacific.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COGST 1111
class title: Making a Difference by Design
description: This course provides a broad overview of design applied various disciplines, scales, and problem contexts, and how design can offer an alternative, and often more human-centered perspective towards solving the problems around us. With a focus on designing with a human-centered mindset in this age of technology, we will examine topics on the role of design in wearable computing, virtual and tangible interfaces, robotics to biology. We will also apply the lens of design to issues on sustainability, healthy environments, diversity and inclusion, and designing for social good. Each week, through case studies and familiar examples, DEA 1110 explores how designing is part of every discipline.
outcome: Comprehend disciplines and fields, develop an understanding of design applied across a wide range of disciplines to make a difference, and learn to appreciate design at different scales and applied across problem contexts., Apply multi-disciplinary perspectives, identify and examine the relationship between design, technology, and other disciplines, and proactively apply interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary perspectives to problem-solving., Write, speak, and use visual communications effectively, demonstrate the ability to develop and communicate one's creative ideas effectively through writing, visuals, and tangible prototypes., 

class: COGST 1500
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology
description: Environmental Psychology is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams.
outcome: Provide overview of knowledge about the environment and human behavior (grounding in field)., Understand cultural and life course diversity in human-environment interactions (sensitivity to diversity)., Learn how to analyze problems like an environmental psychologist (develop critical thinking skill)., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COGST 1501
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology - Writing in the Major
description: Human-Environment Relations is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams. Lecture and discussion sections. WIM section attends a regular lecture but also meets weekly with a graduate writing instructor. The two principal objectives of WIM section:
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COGST 2200
class title: The Human Brain and Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience
description: At the turn of the 21st century the age of Embodied Cognition dawned: a reconsideration of relationships between body, brain, and mind. Researchers in philosophy, psychology, linguistics, and cognitive neuroscience challenged the 20th-century dogma that the mind is like a digital computer, and can be studied independently of the body, brain, and world. Researchers turned their attention to the role that bodily experience plays in thinking and learning, and the roles neural systems for perception and action play in cognition. This course views the field of Cognitive Neuroscience through the lens of Embodied Cognition research, and evaluates the extent to which "embodiment" may be passing fad, a useful shift in perspective, or a revolutionary new way of building theories about brain and mind. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: COGST 2230
class title: Intro to Behavioral Neuroscience
description: Introduction to psychology from a biological perspective, which focuses on brain mechanisms of behavior. Topics include the structure and function of the nervous system, physiological approaches to understanding behavior, hormones and behavior, biological bases of sensation and perception, learning and memory, cognition, emotion, and communication.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: COGST 2300
class title: Cognitive Development
description: This course will provide you with an overview of how children's cognition develops. We will investigate how cognition develops from many different perspectives. The main perspectives will be biological, genetic-epistemological, socio-cultural, and information-processing ones. This course also will help you to understand how cognition influences other areas of development, including intelligence, development of the self, language, and social development. Finally, different populations will be considered to better understand the roles not only of nature and nurture, but also of how the two interact to influence development.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COGST 2310
class title: Introduction to Deductive Logic
description: Covers sentential languages, the truth-functional connectives, and their logic; first-order languages, the quantifiers "every" and "some," and their logic.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: COGST 2621
class title: Minds and Machines
description: Throughout history, metaphors drawn from technology of the time have been proposed to understand how the mind works. While Locke likened the newborn's mind to a blank slate, Freud compared the mind to hydraulic and electro-magnetic systems. More recently, many have endorsed Turing's proposal that the mind is a computer. Why is this idea attractive and what exactly is a computer? Is it at all plausible that the cells of your brain are computing? Could a computer ever really have a mind, beliefs, emotions and conscious experiences? What are these mysterious things anyway? Could a machine ever count as a person and make choices based on its own free will? Is it really so clear that we have this kind of free will?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: COGST 3135
class title: The Psychology of Good and Evil
description: Morality seems to be a universal feature of humananity. People across time, place and culture have a strong sense that certain things are right or wrong, that some people are good and some are evil. Where does this moral sense come from? Why do some people disagree so strongly about what is right and wrong? How did evolution shape this moral sense? How does it develop? Are there any universal aspects of moral psychology? The goals of this course are to offer an introduction to the psychological science behind what humans know as morality.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PSYCH 1101.

class: COGST 3190
class title: Memory and the Law
description: Focuses on how the scientific study of human memory interfaces with the theory and practice of law.
outcome: Students will demonstrate the presentation of clear and effective arguments in a written communication format., Students will demonstrate their ability to understand and apply course material in an objective manner., 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: COGST 3240
class title: Behavioral Neuroscience Laboratory
description: This course is designed to provide an introduction to experimental research on the neural basis of behavior and cognition in animals. Topics will include basic neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, neural and hormonal control of behavior, and learning and memory. Students will gain extensive hands on experience with a variety of laboratory techniques, and animal species, and behaviors.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: PSYCH 2230 or BIONB 2220.

class: COGST 3300
class title: Introduction to Computational Neuroscience
description: Covers the basic ideas and techniques involved in computational neuroscience. Surveys diverse topics, including neural dynamics of small networks of cells, neural coding, learning in neural networks and in brain structures, memory models of the hippocampus, sensory coding, and others.
outcome: Basic understanding of current theories of brain function., How to construct representations from tuning curves., Plasticity and how it relates to memory., Models of human memory., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2220 or permission of instructor.

class: COGST 3801
class title: Introduction to Game Theory and Strategic Thinking
description: Some knowledge of game-theory is essential in today's age of complex decision-making, diplomacy, and corporate strategizing. This course is an introduction to the basic principles of game theory and rational choice. The course is designed for students with an interest in economics, political strategy, moral philosophy, and algorithmic reasoning. Important ideas and concepts, with real-life illustrations, will be discussed. Over the semester students will learn the essential ideas of Nash, Schelling and others, different conceptualizations of equilibrium, such as the Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection, and how they apply to different contexts, such as competition among firms, war, and diplomacy. The course will help us understand everyday phenomena, such as addiction, procrastination and moral dilemmas, and show how reasoning can be a critical input for personal happiness. Students will be introduced to some unresolved paradoxes of rational behavior and encouraged to try to solve them on their own.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: COGST 4250
class title: Translational Research on Decision Making
description: Introductory laboratory-based course focusing on basic foundations in translational research on decision making across the lifespan. The course introduces students to hands-on applications of research skills in the context of research on decision making, spanning basic and applied research in law, medicine, behavioral economics, and policy. It focuses on such topics as human subjects protection, working with populations across the lifespan (e.g., children, seniors), database development, working with external partners and stakeholders (e.g., schools, hospitals), and basic concepts and techniques in decision research. Students participate in weekly laboratory meetings in small teams focused on specific projects as well as monthly meetings in which all teams participate. During laboratory meetings, students discuss ongoing research, plans for new studies, and interpretations of empirical findings from studies that are in progress or have been recently completed. New students work closely with experienced students and eventually work more independently. In order to fully grasp how the research projects fit into the broader field, students read relevant papers weekly and write reaction responses. Because several projects are ongoing at all times, students have the opportunity to be involved in more than one study and are assigned multiple tasks such as piloting research paradigms, subject recruitment, data collection, data analysis, and data entry. Students attend a weekly lab meeting for 1.5 hours per week, read pertinent papers, write reaction responses, and work 10.5 hours per week in the laboratory completing tasks that contribute to ongoing research studies.
outcome: Be able to know and evaluate evidence-based hypotheses., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 1150 or HD 1170 or PSYCH 1101 also HD 2830 and HD 4750 and HD 4760.

class: COGST 4265
class title: Translational Research on Memory and Neuroscience
description: Laboratory-based course focusing on basic foundations in translational research on the neuroscience of human memory and memory development. Students attend a weekly lab meeting for 1.5 hours per week, read pertinent papers, write reaction responses, and work 10.5 hours per week in the laboratory completing tasks that contribute to ongoing research studies.
outcome: Be able to interpret results of statistical analyses with respect to theory., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 1150 or HD 1170 or PSYCH 1101 and HD 2600.

class: COGST 4270
class title: Evolution of Language
description: Seminar surveying a cross-section of modern theories, methods, and research pertaining to the origin and evolution of language. Considers evidence from psychology, the cognitive neurosciences, theoretical biology, comparative psychology, and computational modeling of evolutionary processes. Topics for discussion may include: What is special about language? What can we learn from comparative perspectives on neurobiology and behavior? Can apes really learn language? Did language come about through natural selection or cultural evolution?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: any one course in psychology or human development.

class: COGST 4331
class title: Event Cognition: How Minds, Brains and Bodies Experience Events
description: People experience and remember complex and dynamic environments as events. This seminar draws on work from cognitive neuroscience to characterize how people shape experience into events, and how these processes support adaptive behavior. The course will start with discussions of historical and modern perspectives about the relationships between minds, bodies, and experience. We will then cover topics ranging from the perception of motion and causality to social learning and interaction. The primary goals are for you to be able to (1) read and evaluate research in psychology, cognitive science, and neuroscience, and (2) describe and understand the implications of this research for how minds and bodies are adapted to everyday situations.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a course in PSYCH, COGST, HD or NBB. 

class: COGST 4420
class title: The Psychology and Ethics of 21st Century Technology
description: New technologies are changing our world at a rapid pace. In many cases, the society does not fully understand the impact of technology and is not prepared for the speed of the change that is occurring. This course will explore a few of these new technologies and investigate their effects on the users and on the society at large. The topics that will be explored include face recognition, virtual reality, violence in media, general AI, and the technological singularity. We will look at the ways in which these technologies affect our lives, with a focus on education, entertainment, employment, politics, and the future of humanity.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: COGST 4435
class title: Confronting Climate Change
description: This course on the climate crisis acquaints students with the psychological factors underlying ecocide and anthropogenic climate change and the possible avenues for its mitigation, with a particular focus on climate justice and Indigenous knowledges and ways of relating to nature. In parallel with reading and discussing primary literature on these topics, students work on research projects, complementing theory with practice and placing it in the local geopolitical context.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: COGST 4700
class title: Undergraduate Research in Cognitive Science
description: Experience in planning, conducting, and reporting independent laboratory, field, and/or library research in an interdisciplinary area relevant to Cognitive Science.

class: COGST 4710
class title: Cognitive Science Research Workshop
description: Provides a research workshop in which undergraduate students who are engaged in research in a particular area relevant to cognitive science can meet across disciplines to learn and practice the essentials of research using interdisciplinary approaches. In this workshop, students critique and discuss the existing literature in a field of inquiry, individual students present their research designs, methods, and results from their independent research studies, debate the interpretation of their research results, and participate in the generation of new research hypotheses and designs, in a peer group of other undergraduate students involved in related research.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: enrollment in an independent research course either in Cognitive Science (e.g.,COGST 4700) or in a related department or in honors thesis research in one of the departments relevant to Cognitive Science.

class: COGST 4730
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: COGST 6020
class title: Research in Risk and Rational Decision Making
description: This hands-on laboratory course will develop research skills in the context of risk and rational decision making in human development from multiple disciplinary perspectives and with respect to different kinds of decision-making under risk and uncertainty.  Topics will depend on student interests but may include decisions about war, terrorism, cancer control and prevention (e.g., screening tests), personal behaviors that involve risk (e.g., HIV prevention), and other public health risks (e.g., vaccinations), law enforcement (e.g., use of a weapon), and legal decision making (e.g., jury deliberations). Students will read the research literature, discuss the latest empirical findings and scientific theories of risk and rationality, and engage in group work and peer review to hone their skills.  Students will then design research projects and engage in research activities as well as read additional references tailored to their interests.

class: COGST 6331
class title: Event Cognition: How Minds, Brains and Bodies Experience Events

class: COGST 6710
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: COGST 7710
class title: Computational Seminar
description: Addresses current theoretical and empirical issues in computational linguistics.

class: COLLS 3970
class title: Independent Study - Senior Project
description: Topic and credit hours as arranged between faculty and student. A copy of the proposal must be sent to the College Scholar Program at as_csp@cornell.edu.

class: COLLS 4990
class title: Honors Research I
description: COLLS 4990 is the first part of the year-long thesis course in the College Scholar Program. Students submit their completed proposals to as_csp@cornell.edu and to their honors thesis committee by the add deadline in their penultimate semester. COLLS 4990 is added to the students' schedules once the thesis proposed has been approved.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two approved College Scholar seminars.

class: COLLS 4991
class title: Honors Research II
description: COLLS 4991 is the second part of the year-long honors thesis course in the College Scholar Program. All students enrolled in COLLS 4991 present their findings at an event in the spring (exact dates TBD).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COLLS 4990.

class: COML 1104
class title: FWS: Reading Films
description: We live in an image-saturated world. How do we make sense of the moving image and its powerful roles in shaping culture and mediating our relationship with the world? This course will equip students with the tools to understand and decipher film language. It introduces and interrogates the basic notions, technologies, terminologies, and theories of film analysis. We will study visual and compositional elements, like mise-en-scène, cinematography, editing, and sound. Films we discuss will include different geographies, genres, major directors, schools, and film movements. Through writing, students will learn to analyze films with accurate, medium-specific vocabulary, develop informed and nuanced arguments, and critically reflect on the position of the viewer.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COML 1105
class title: FWS: Books with Big Ideas
description: What do Frankenstein and Things Fall Apart have in common? What lies behind the fantastical stories of Aladdin? Do we have to like Garcia Márquez and Shakespeare? These texts and authors re-imagine the human experience at its most intriguing level. In this course, we will discuss human rights, intimacy, joy, isolation, and other controversies at the heart of these books. Throughout the semester, students will learn how to articulate an informed and nuanced position on these issues via formal practices in analytical readings, drafting, peer review, and self-editing. Actual selection of readings may vary depending on the instructor's focus.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COML 1106
class title: FWS: Robots
description: In 2015, Japan's SoftBank Robotics Corporation announced the world's first robot with feelings. Many people were excited, many more disturbed. If robots are simply, as the dictionary suggests, machines "designed to function in the place of a living agent," then what is so disturbing about them? Since robots are designed to replace human labor (first economic, and now also emotional), do they represent a threat as much as they do an aid? What happens when robots exceed their purpose, and become more humanlike? How do robots read, write, and feel? How do the activities of coding and writing, or decoding and reading differ? Students will be equipped with the vocabulary and writing strategies to rigorously analyze, compare, and debate the meaning of robots in the human imagination from different epochs, countries, languages, and media. In doing so, they will write in a variety of registers about works such as the play R.U.R. by Karel Čapek, who invented the term "robot". Other materials may include philosophical texts, fiction, videogames, films, graphic novels, and hip-hop concept albums.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COML 1119
class title: FWS: A Taste of Russian Literature
description: Explore the culinary tradition and culture of Russia in broad historical, geopolitical and socioeconomic context through the lens of Russian folklore, short stories of Gogol, Chekhov, and Bulgakov, works of contemporary Russian-American writers, visual art, and international film. The literary journey will take you from the lavish tables of the 18th century aristocracy to the hardship and austerity of GULAG prison, to the colorful and savory regional fare of the former Russian Empire and Soviet Union, to the fridge and pantry staples in the everyday life of Russian family. Your writing assignments will help you develop critical thinking and argumentative skills, precision and clarity of expression, ability to write with discipline, creativity, and sense of style.  
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COML 2006
class title: Punk Culture: The Art and Politics of Refusal
description: Punk Culture–comprised of music, fashion, literature, and visual arts–represents a complex critical stance of resistance and refusal that coalesced at a particular historical moment in the mid-1970s, and continues to be invoked, revived, and revised. In this course we will explore punk's origins in New York and London, U.S. punk's regional differences (the New York scene's connection to the art and literary worlds, Southern California's skate and surf culture, etc.), its key movements (hardcore, straight edge, riot grrrl, crust, queercore), its race, class and gender relations, and its ongoing influence on global youth culture. We will read, listen, and examine a variety of visual media to analyze how punk draws from and alters previous aesthetic and political movements. No previous experience studying music is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2030
class title: Comparative Literature, Film, and Media
description: Take your love for literature, film and media into uncharted waters. This course explores cutting-edge debates in the humanities today through the prism of in the transnational, multilingual discipline of Comparative Literature. Attending closely to selected philosophical and literary works as well as film and visual culture we will survey new questions arising from, translation studies, literary and political theory, world literature, gender and sexuality studies, environmental humanities, and media studies. Authors, artists, texts and directors may include, Gilgamesh, Gustave Flaubert, Franz Kafka, Judith Butler, Mahasweta Devi, Raymond Williams, Teju Cole, Ai WeiWei, Abderrahmane Sissako, and others.
 
Topics may include: postcolonial theory, translation, BIPOC studies, gender and sexuality studies, environmental studies, and media studies. Writing assignments will include a range of forms, genres, and media that help us hone our analytical, critical, and creative understanding, reflection, and expression.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2235
class title: New Visions in African Cinema
description: This undergraduate course introduces the formal and topical innovations that African cinema has experienced since its inception in the 1960s. Sections will explore, among others, Nollywood, sci-fi, and ideological cinema. Films include: Abderrahmane Sissako's Bamako, Mohamed Camara's Dakan, Djibril Diop Mambéty's Touki-Bouki, Cheikh Oumar Sissoko's Finzan, Anne-Laure Folly's Women with Open Eyes, Ousmane Sembène's Camp de Thiaroye, Jean-Pierre Bekolo's Quartier Mozart.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2251
class title: Poetry's Image
description: Where do we get our images of poets, and of poetry? Along with the images we find in poems themselves, how do poetry and poets figure in fiction and film, in music and popular culture? How do such figures inform both the images we find in poems and poetry's own image? What is poetry's relation to other genres, discourses, and disciplines, to self and language, history and politics? Exploring such issues in verse and prose, in fiction, film, and other media, including among others Blake, Wordsworth, Keats, Dickinson, Poe, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Pound, Stein, Williams, Neruda, Parra, and Bolaño, the course will arc toward such impactful contemporaries as Cathy Park Hong, Claudia Rankine, Layla Long Soldier,  Kendrick Lamar, Ilya Kaminsky, Jenny Xie, the website-based Young Hae Chang Heavy Industries, and AI-generated poetry.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2282
class title: Speculative Asias
description: This course explores Asian speculative literary fiction and cinema including early mythological influences, science fiction, and contemporary discourses of technoscientific progress. Students will examine the historical development of the broad genres in their specific contexts; the conceptual relations between realism, science, fantasy, and speculation; and ultimately, question past and future understandings of "Asia" as speculative.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2400
class title: Introduction to U.S. Latinx Literature
description: Latina/os have always been part of U.S. history, yet the media often represents Latinx as only recent immigrants or as stereotypes that reduce rich cultures into a single, unified category or group of people. This practice hides the many unique and varied voices, stories, experiences, and ideas produced by Latinx expressive practices in forms ranging from novels and poetry to podcasts, tiktoks, films, theater, comics, memoirs, visual arts, and dance. This course will sample all of these forms while considering how artists meditate on their experiences of home, friendship, languages, love, migration, education, racialization, within the contexts of histories of colonization, discrimination, war, invasion, revolution, and ongoing activist organizing for resistance, sustainability, and thriving futures. In addition to common material, students will also have the chance to explore specific expressive practices that interest them.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2580
class title: Imagining the Holocaust
description: How is the memory of the Holocaust kept alive by means of the literary and visual imagination? Within the historical context of the Holocaust and how and why it occurred, we shall examine major and widely read Holocaust narratives that have shaped the way we understand and respond to the Holocaust. We also study ethical and psychological issues about how and why people behave in dire circumstances. We shall begin with first-person reminiscences—Wiesel's Night , Levi's Survival at Auschwitz, and The Diary of Anne Frank—before turning to realistic fictions such as Kineally's Schindler's List (and Spielberg's film), Kertesz's Fateless, Kosinski's The Painted Bird, and Ozick's "The Shawl." We shall also read the Kafkaesque parable of Appelfeld's Badenheim 1939 and the fantastic cartoons of Spiegelman's Maus books as well as W.G, Sebald's Austerlitz. We shall conclude with several episodes of the acclaimed 2009-2017 French TV series A French Village.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 2754
class title: Wondrous Literatures of the Near East
description: This course examines Near East's rich and diverse literary heritage. We will read a selection of influential and wondrous texts from ancient to modern times, spanning geographically from the Iberian peninsula to Iran. We will explore a range of ancient myths of creation and destruction. We will also trace encounters with otherness in travel narratives. Together we will read and discuss such ancient works as the "The Story of Sinuhe" and "The Epic of Gilgamesh," as well as selections from the Hebrew Bible, New Testament and Qur'an. We will explore medieval works such as the "Travels" of Ibn Battuta, the "Shahnameh" of Ferdowsi, and "The Arabian Nights." We will also read Orhan Pamuk's My Name is Red, and Sonia Nimr's Wondrous Journeys in Strange Lands, as well as excerpts from Yochi Brandes's The Orchard. Students will also have the opportunity to research and analyze primary source materials in the collections of Cornell Rare Books and Manuscript Collection, and the Johnson Art Museum. All material is in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3001
class title: Methods of Comparison
description: What do comparatists do when we approach our objects of study? What enables or justifies comparison across different languages, different genres, different media, and different disciplines? Does all comparison assume a common ground of some kind (whether historical, formal, conceptual, or ideological), or is comparison inherently ungrounded, provocative, or political? We will explore these questions through examination of a wide range of comparative projects, from those often cited as foundational to the discipline and their most important critics to contemporary comparative projects that are reshaping the discipline and expanding it in new directions. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3010
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: COML 3012
class title: Remembering Socialism: Literature and Film After the End of History
description: More than thirty years after the end of the Soviet Union, we have the distance needed to view the twentieth-century state socialist project from a historical perspective–even as Cold War tropes are revived amid another major confrontation with Russia. In this course, we will analyze memoirs, oral histories, historical fiction, films, and TV shows that look back at this period. How do the makers of these works use genre as a political as well as artistic tool? What are the political implications of comedy, cosplay, or melodrama when applied to communism? How does the portrayal of this period change as state socialism recedes into the distance? Texts from Russia, Ukraine, Germany, the Balkans, the UK, and the United States.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3111
class title: Literature, Art, and the Environment
description: This course examines how philosophical, architectural, filmic, and literary practices shape our understanding of place and space, engaging with theories of mapping, spatiality, and the built environment. Does dwelling on this earth imply building? Is thinking itself an architectural act? What would it mean to undo this 'will to architecture'? What is the relation of the act to the environment? What does the situation of 'things and locations' mean for the possibilities of politics and thought? We will examine poetic and philosophical dimensions of place and site; modernity, nihilism, and its critique; belonging, the uncanny, and the stranger; utopia, dystopia, and the global built environment through readings, films, and artistic practices from figures and groups including Archigram, Bachelard, Badiou, Massimo Cacciari, Derrida, Heidegger, Isozaki Arata, Jameson, Karatani, Kiarostami, Henri Lefebvre, WG Sebald, Wallace Stevens, Superstudio, Manfredo Tafuri, Tarkovsky, Raymond Williams, and more.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3115
class title: Video and New Media: Art, Theory, Politics
description: The course will offer an overview of video art, alternative documentary video, and digital installation and networked art. It will analyze four phases of video and new media: (1) the development of video from its earliest turn away from television; (2) video's relation to art and installation; (3) video's migration into digital art; (4) the relation of video and new media to visual theory and social movements. Screenings will include early political and feminist video (Ant Farm, Rosler, Paper Tiger TV, Jones), conceptual video of the '80s and '90s (Vasulka, Lucier, Viola, Hill), gay and multicultural video of the '90s (Muntadas, Riggs, Piper, Fung, Parmar), networked and activist new media of the 21st century (Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, SubRosa, Preemptive Media). Secondary theoretical readings on postmodernism, video theory, multicultural theory, and digital culture will provide students with a cultural and political context for the discussion of video and new media style, dissemination, and reception.

class: COML 3240
class title: Blood Politics: Comparative Renaissance Drama
description: Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in terms of blood? In the course of trying to answer this and other questions of blood, we will read plays by Shakespeare, Webster, Kyd, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, and Calderón de la Barca. Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality, conversion, and death.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3261
class title: Global Cinema and Media
description: Global Cinema and Media offers a survey of international film and media history from the late nineteenth century to today. Through a focus on key films and significant epochs, the course traces the evolution of form, style and genre, the medium's changing technologies and business models, as well as film and media's relation to broader cultural, social and political contexts. Screenings of narrative, documentary and experimental films and video will be accompanied by readings in film and media theory and history.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3314
class title: Korean Literature and Performance: From P'ansori to K-Pop
description: This course examines Korean literature and performance traditions from the Chosŏn dynasty (1392-1910) to the present. Through performance workshops, the course enables students to experience how Korean epic and lyric traditions were performed in the past and how they continue to flourish in the present across various media, including recorded music, written texts, and film. We will examine how Korean literature and performance traditions have transformed over time, with attention given to how these traditions speak to local and global audiences following the Korean Wave. The course concludes with recent developments in Korean popular music, including K-pop bands and K-hip-hop. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korean culture is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3340
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: COML 3378
class title: Korean American Literature
description: The rapidly growing literature of the Korean diaspora is one of the most significant developments in Korean literature since the 20th century. As Korean literature has circulated as world literature, it has become more widely recognized in the Anglophone world through translation and through narratives written by Korean American authors. This course will explore Korean American literature and creative transpacific exchanges between Korea and the US, addressing issues of identity, language, place, migration, race discrimination, citizenship, and the ways in which storytelling shapes community. We will examine the vibrant dialogue between works of fiction and poetry across the Pacific, reading the work of Korean American authors alongside the writing of Korean authors working in the Korean language. Increasingly, Korean American writers are creating narratives that remember and reconfigure Korean history and Korea's relationship to the US, and we will explore narratives and poetry that offer new perspectives on the Japanese colonial period, the Korean War, and American imperialism such as Min Jin Lee's Pachinko, Chang-rae Lee's The Surrendered, and Don Mee Choi's DMZ Colony. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korea is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3685
class title: Feminism and Islam in North Africa
description: The course is a survey of Feminist Islamic thinkers from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, and their diaspora, featuring both French and Arabic texts in English translation. The purpose of the course is to critically explore the competing treatment of major gendered tropes in a Muslim context (the veil, the harem, polygamy, etc.) by North African thinkers, through their examination of qur'anic surats/hadiths, the evolution of tafsirs (tradion of qur'anic exegesis) as well as their conflicting approaches to secular western feminism. Readings might include: Fatema Mernissi, Asmaa Lamrabet, Qasim Amin, Naguib Mahfoud, Assia Djebar, Mona Eltahawy, and Nawal El-Saadawi.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 3781
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COML 3891
class title: Occupied France Through Film
description: The Second World War and the Occupation of France by German forces had a traumatic impact on the nation's identity. We will examine the way France has tried to deal with this conflicted period through a series of films that each deal, directly or indirectly with the major questions posed by history to French "memory" of the Occupation. What was the role of collaboration, resistance, anti-Semitism, of writers and intellectuals during this traumtic period? How has film helped to define and re-shape the ways in which France has come to terms with its conflicted past?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4190
class title: Independent Study
description: COML 4190 and COML 4200 may be taken independently of each other. Undergraduate student and faculty advisor to determine course of study and credit hours.

class: COML 4242
class title: Metamorphoses in Renaissance Literature and Culture
description: Stories of transformation have been central to literary traditions for thousands of years, but these tales of shape-shifting took on a special life in the English Renaissance, when Ovid's Metamorphoses surged in popularity. This course will explore the fundamental connection between literary creativity and unstable identities – whether these narratives of metamorphosis show humans turning to beasts, trees, or stones, men changing into women, or inanimate objects coming to life and taking human form. Class readings draw on examples from Ovid, Shakespeare, and other Renaissance poets, as well as the re-imagining of these fantasies in modern science fiction and make-over shows. What do these stories of metamorphosis tell us about what it means to be human – or not?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4281
class title: Human-Centered Design and Engaged Media
description: This StudioLab course connects critical design teams with researchers, NGOs, and nonprofits working on human rights, public health, and environmental and land rights in the US and abroad. Practicing methods of transmedia knowledge, critical design thinking, and strategic storytelling, students collaborate on projects with the Center on the Death Penalty Worldwide, Health Access Connect (Uganda), NYS 4-H, and SOOFA Ranch (GA). Consulting on partners' ongoing projects, teams study and practice processes from IDEO's Human-Centered Design Thinking and Stanford's Design for Extreme Affordability, as well as UX, tactical media, and activist organizing developed by ACT-UP, Black Lives Matter, Guerrilla Girls, and contemporary, multi-platform campaigns, presenting and sharing their collaborations via project site and other platforms.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4485
class title: The Althusserian Legacy
description: The work of Louis Althusser remains a central and canonical reference for contemporary theory, but also a historical reference of major importance for its intellectual history. Althusser not only taught or mentored an extraordinary range of intellectual figures in France (Badiou, Balibar, Derrida, Foucault, Macherey, Ranciere, etc), his basic concepts circulated through crucial social debates in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (humanism and anti-humanism, the articulation of modes of production, societies structured in domination). In his later years, Althusser's thought acknowledged surprisingly divergent filiations (Heidegger, Derrida) from the expected Marxian and psychoanalytic references, and his legacy became central to the foundations of Cultural Studies. This seminar will examine a wide range of developments and destinies for the theoretical legacies of Althusser and his close collaborators.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4697
class title: Is Nature Silent?
description: Thoreau, in 1841: "Nature is always silent and unpretending as at the break of day." He had just contrasted the robin's song with "the bustle and impatience of man." Why could silence contain birdsong but not human noise? This course explores the idea and representation of nature's silence—as a positive ideal; as soundlessness; as wordlessness; and as extinction. Heeding the environmental criticism that interrogates the contrast between silent "Nature" and noisy humanity, we will remain curious about what compels us in accounts of nature's multivalent silence. Concurrently, we will examine writings that attend to natural sound. Investigating silence, we will also strive to better understand what we mean, and what could be meant, by nature.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: COML 4861
class title: Genres, Platforms, Media
description: How do questions of genre persist and evolve in the age of digital media and A.I.? To what extent do we choose our genres, and in what ways do they choose us? How do genres, platforms, and media intersect and inform one another? What hierarchies do they establish, and to what purposes? Moving among a range of genres and sub-genres, poetry, fiction, film, and multimedia, websites and streaming services, this course will explore the accelerating interplay of genres, platforms, and media, and the increasingly pervasive role of A.I., in contemporary culture and politics.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: COML 4930
class title: Senior Essay
description: Times TBA individually in consultation with director of Senior Essay Colloquium. Approximately 50 pages to be written over the course of two semesters in the student's senior year under the direction of the student's advisor. An R grade is assigned on the basis of research and a preliminary draft completed in the first semester. A letter grade is awarded on completion of the second semester, COML 4940.

class: COML 4940
class title: Senior Essay
description: Times TBA individually in consultation with director of Senior Essay Colloquium. Approximately 50 pages to be written over the course of two semesters in the student's senior year under the direction of the student's advisor. An R grade is assigned on the basis of research and a preliminary draft completed in the first semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COML 4930.

class: COML 6021
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: COML 6190
class title: Independent Study
description: This course gives students the opportunity to work with a selected instructor to pursue special interests or research not treated in regularly scheduled courses. After getting permission of the instructor, students should enroll online in the instructor's section. Enrolled students are required to provide the department with a course description and/or syllabus along with the instructor's approval by the end of the first week of classes.

class: COML 6224
class title: Writing for the Public: Adapting Academic Work for a General Audience
description: This workshop-style course will address the question of how to draw on academic research and expertise to write for a non-specialist audience. We will discuss the benefits of public-facing writing; how to select a publication to pitch; how to pitch an article; and how to draft and revise an article once a pitch has been accepted. These skills will be developed through practice. Students will develop real pitch ideas to use as a basis for articles that will be drafted and revised over the course of the semester. We will discuss questions such as selecting appropriate venues, adapting to a new writing style, sourcing, citation practices, and communicating with editors.

class: COML 6290
class title: Comparative Literature Proseminar
description: Structured around guest and public lectures by field members and beyond, the proseminar provides a common experience for students and facilitates the exchange of approaches to theoretical problems and methodological orientations. Thus, the course introduces students to the work and methods that animate their faculty's original contributions to their respective fields while offering them a forum to ask said faculty how to navigate the various stages of research and publication processes.

class: COML 6314
class title: Korean Literature and Performance: From P'ansori to K-Pop
description: This course examines Korean literature and performance traditions from the Chosŏn dynasty (1392-1910) to the present. Through performance workshops, the course enables students to experience how Korean epic and lyric traditions were performed in the past and how they continue to flourish in the present across various media, including recorded music, written texts, and film. We will examine how Korean literature and performance traditions have transformed over time, with attention given to how these traditions speak to local and global audiences following the Korean Wave. The course concludes with recent developments in Korean popular music, including K-pop bands and K-hip-hop. Readings for the course will be in English or in English translation and no prior knowledge of Korean culture is necessary.

class: COML 6368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought. 

class: COML 6382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.

class: COML 6424
class title: Beauty, Grief
description: This course is for anyone drawn to beauty-and anyone who, within the beautiful, finds the trace of a loss. What do we grieve, what do we miss, when we find ourselves in the presence of beauty? And what, in every retrospective, prospective or otherwise non-present beauty, do we nonetheless crave and nonetheless mourn? What is the beauty hidden within mourning? We'll take a look at thinkers, poets, and artists from both modern and premodern culture, potentially including Anne Carson, Augustine of Hippo, Fra Angelico, Gillian Rose, Hervé Guibert, Pepe Espáliu, and others, as we try to sit with dual summons of beauty and grief: beauty or grief.

class: COML 6485
class title: The Althusserian Legacy
description: The work of Louis Althusser remains a central and canonical reference for contemporary theory, but also a historical reference of major importance for its intellectual history. Althusser not only taught or mentored an extraordinary range of intellectual figures in France (Badiou, Balibar, Derrida, Foucault, Macherey, Ranciere, etc), his basic concepts circulated through crucial social debates in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (humanism and anti-humanism, the articulation of modes of production, societies structured in domination). In his later years, Althusser's thought acknowledged surprisingly divergent filiations (Heidegger, Derrida) from the expected Marxian and psychoanalytic references, and his legacy became central to the foundations of Cultural Studies. This seminar will examine a wide range of developments and destinies for the theoretical legacies of Althusser and his close collaborators.

class: COML 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: COML 6697
class title: Is Nature Silent?
description: Thoreau, in 1841: "Nature is always silent and unpretending as at the break of day." He had just contrasted the robin's song with "the bustle and impatience of man." Why could silence contain birdsong but not human noise? This course explores the idea and representation of nature's silence—as a positive ideal; as soundlessness; as wordlessness; and as extinction. Heeding the environmental criticism that interrogates the contrast between silent "Nature" and noisy humanity, we will remain curious about what compels us in accounts of nature's multivalent silence. Concurrently, we will examine writings that attend to natural sound. Investigating silence, we will also strive to better understand what we mean, and what could be meant, by nature.

class: COML 6791
class title: Acoustic Horizons
description: The course will explore the philosophy, psychoanalysis, and politics of sound along the artistic interface of cinema, video, performance, and new media art.  From analysis of synchronization of sound and image in the talking movie to its discruption in experimental music, video, new media and sound art, we will consider the prominence of sound and noise as carriers of gender, ethnic and cultural difference.  We also will explore the theory of sound, from tracts on futurism, feminism, new music, and sampling, to more recent acoustic applications of eco-theory in which sound merges with discourses of water and environment.  In addition to studying a wide range of artistic production in audio, sound, new media, and screen arts, we will discuss the dialogical impact of theoretical discussions of sound in psychoanalysis and aesthetics, as well as the phenomenal growth of digital acoustic horizons in the Pacific Rim.

class: COML 6861
class title: Genres, Platforms, Media
description: How do questions of genre persist and evolve in the age of digital media and A.I.? To what extent do we choose our genres, and in what ways do they choose us? How do genres, platforms, and media intersect and inform one another? What hierarchies do they establish, and to what purposes? Moving among a range of genres and sub-genres, poetry, fiction, film, and multimedia, websites and streaming services, this course will explore the accelerating interplay of genres, platforms, and media, and the increasingly pervasive role of A.I., in contemporary culture and politics.

class: COMM 1101
class title: Introduction to Communication
description: This course will provide an introduction to the study of Communication. Topics include the functions, foundations, models, and modes of communication. Students will be introduced to research methods and begin to master the research and study skills required to be a successful scholar of communication. An overview of concepts and processes related to the functions of communication will be examined through current theoretical and empirical research.
outcome: Students will be able to express a thoughtful awareness of the role of communication in their own life., Students will be able to identify how communication processes shape human thoughts and actions., Students will be able to articulate the difference in how evidence is used in various social-scientific approaches to understanding communication phenomena., Students will be able to demonstrate an evidence-based perspective on the structures, processes, and effects of communication., Students will be able to identify and apply theoretical perspectives to understand and ask communication-related research questions., Students will be able to evaluate the strengths and limitations of communication theories., Students will be able to find, summarize, and synthesize quality communication research publications., Students will be able to identify gaps in what is known about human communication., Students will be able to begin to critically evaluate how inferences are made from observations., Students will be able to critique inappropriate citation and methodological choices, formulate a high quality APA style research paper investigating a specific communication phenomenon in depth from a unique perspective., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: COMM 1105
class title: FWS: Action or Despair? Media Representations of Climate
description: How we think about the climate crisis is shaped by the stories that various media tell us about our relationship with nature. From films such as The Day After Tomorrow and Elizabeth Kolbert's book Field Notes From a Catastrophe to Banksy's street art and news reports, we are presented with a vision of the future filled with despair and hopelessness. Do such messages work to raise awareness and drive change, or do they instill a sense of fatalism that prevents us from taking meaningful action? In this course we will think and write about how climate change is conceptualized and communicated in a range of assignments including critical interpretation of texts, a comparative analysis paper, a book or film review and a researched argument essay.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COMM 1106
class title: FWS: Manufacturing Need: Writing About the Power of Advertising
description: From Dove soap ads to Budweiser's famous Super Bowl commercials, companies vie for our attention in order to persuade us to buy their products. But what exactly are they selling us? This course will explore the ways in which print and video advertisements craft stories that capitalize on our best intentions and deepest anxieties. By identifying design elements such as use of color, lighting, spatial arrangement, music, and dialogue, students will assess and critique how visual ads make persuasive arguments that often work against our better judgment. We will then consider ads that harness this power to deliver positive messages through PSAs and advocacy advertising. Assignments will include rhetorical and critical analysis papers, creative briefs for a mock marketing campaign, and a video essay.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COMM 1111
class title: Navigating the Communication Major and Beyond
description: This course introduces the Communication major and focuses on transitioning to college life, developing your academic identity, and making meaning of your college experience. You will develop a learning community, identify your support network, and explore what Cornell offers to you as a first-year Communication student. Course content will promote the development of skills for balancing academic success with extracurricular and interpersonal activities during your time in the major.
outcome: Describe what you can learn and experience in your major and explore possible career paths associated with the Communication Major., Identify your academic goals and the opportunities, resources, and services that are available to help you meet these goals., Identify and acknowledge your social identity, cultural rules and biases, and the inherent value of being open to diverse perspectives., Develop a learning community and a support network., Engage in self-reflection about how you think and learn, how you interact with others, and how you respond to new information., 

class: COMM 1180
class title: Leading by Mentoring: Being a COMM-Unity Mentor
description: You should take this course if you have accepted an invitation to be a COMM-Unity Project (CUP) Peer Mentor, a fall semester commitment. As a peer mentor in COMM 1180, you will build your mentoring and leadership skills as you mentor first-year underrepresented minority and first-generation undergraduate COMM students. These skills include listening and responding empathetically to student concerns; helping students to identify and find resources for their needs; modeling good study and time management skills; communicating effectively; reflecting on experiences; and articulating goals. This weekly one-hour, one-unit course will give you an opportunity to learn about resources on campus and to talk with other peer mentors about successes and challenges.
outcome: Students will be able to demonstrate active listening techniques and comfortably cultivate conversations with fellow students from different backgrounds, such as SES, race/ethnicity, religion, gender identities, and sexual orientation., Students will be able to model positive mentoring behaviors, including compassion, responsiveness, sensitivity to concerns, and confidentiality., Students will be able to acknowledge the importance of social belonging and the impact of imposter syndrome, and work to create an inclusive community., Students will be able to recognize signs of concern and confer with support leads to steer first-year students to necessary support as needed., Students will be able to model and help mentees identify good study habits, including how to manage time and achieve a sustainable work-life balance., Students will be able to identify and share academic resources such as faculty advisors, teaching assistants, study groups, and other services with mentees., Students will be able to identify key challenges for marginalized populations within higher education., 

class: COMM 1300
class title: Visual Communication
description: Introduction to visual communication theory. Examines how visual images influence our attention, perspectives, and understanding. Constructs a visual analytic language for becoming visually aware and for thinking critically about how visual images influence us. Applies this language to visual artifacts such as photos, maps, comics, and graphs and considers how we communicate visually in various contexts (e.g., with our bodies, in scenes of strong emotion, and in human-built environments).
outcome: Students will be able to master the visual analytical language of images., Students will be able to critically engage with concepts and theories of visual perception and communication., Students will be able to use the visual analytical language of images to analyze, critique, evaluate, and create new visual artifacts., Students will be able to describe the social, cultural, and environmental factors that shape perception and that cause different people to gain different messages from the same visual artifacts., Students will be able to recognize how the creators of visual images employ rhetoric and persuasion to guide viewers to desired perceptions., Students will be able to identify when visual artifacts such as photos, maps, and graphs convey misleading, incorrect, or biased information., Students will be able to interpret the academic literature in visual communication while honing ability to read, comprehend, and critically engage with scholarly research., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: COMM 2010
class title: Oral Communication
description: The course focuses on face-to-face, public communication, but the principles and practices addressed transfer to all purposeful communication situations. While many assume a good speech rests in how well it is delivered, students will learn that a good speech is equally dependent on the development, structure, and integrity of one's ideas. The objectives of the course are for students to speak effectively and ethically, and listen critically.
outcome: Students will be able to use rhetorical strategies toward specific purposes in making oral presentations for different audiences., Students will be able to practice a style of oral delivery that is attentive to audience engagement and rhetorical situations., Students will be able to demonstrate and practice an understanding of the broader ethical dimensions in oral communication emphasizing accountability and attention to diverse voices., Students will be able to Listen, reflect, and evaluate oral communication processes, practices and events., 
distribution categories: (ORL-AG)

class: COMM 2200
class title: Media Communication
description: Introduction to media history, industry, content, policy, process, and effects.
outcome: Students will be able to identify the policies and institutions that impact the content, structure and distribution of media products., Students will be able to describe the economic and structural operations of the media industry., Students will be able to explain various kinds of processes and effects of media on individuals, groups, and society., Students will be able to apply a theory of media effects to a media message or organization., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: COMM 2310
class title: Writing about Communication
description: America's employers consistently rank the ability to communicate as one of the most important career skills for hiring and advancement. This course will strengthen your ability to craft effective written communication for a variety of formats, providing you with a skill set that is applicable in professional and academic settings. Assignments explore social science and communication concepts.
outcome: Students will be able to build skills in a series of tasks critical to high-quality writing; finding, evaluating, analyzing, synthesizing and prioritizing complex material., Students will be able to master the individual components of the writing process; composing, editing, and revising., Students will be able to translate social science and communication theories and concepts for academic and public audiences., Students will be able to maintain the fundamentals of effective writing while adapting style, tone and content to fit a variety of formats and audiences., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 1101 and 3 credits of college-level writing courses. Summer Prerequisite: grade of "B" or better in a 3-credit college writing course.

class: COMM 2450
class title: Communication and Technology
description: Introduces students to the Communication and Information Technologies focus area of the communication department and the Human Systems track for information science. It examines several approaches to understanding technology and its role in human behavior and society. Topics include psychological aspects of computer-mediated communication; how design plays a role in the way we interface with technology and collaborate with each other; and the ways in which communication technology is situated inside social and institutional structures and cultural formations.
outcome: Students will be able to evaluate (both existing and hypothetical) communication technologies using principles of user-centered design., Students will be able to anticipate consequences of communication technology (both existing and hypothetical) on individual behavior and personal well-being., Students will be able to anticipate consequences of communication technology (both existing and hypothetical) on collective behavior and effectiveness., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG)

class: COMM 2990
class title: Directed Research Experience
description: Intended for first-year and sophomore students who are new to undergraduate research. Students may be reading scientific literature, learning research techniques, or assisting with ongoing research. The faculty supervisor determines the work goals and the form of the final report.

class: COMM 3010
class title: Writing and Producing the Narrative for Digital Media
description: New media communication has been blurring the traditional roles of content creator and consumer. Professional communicators—such as journalists, screenwriters, advertising executives, documentarians, and podcasters—are now expected to know how to use alternative storytelling forms to reach their audiences. They need to know how to gather information through a variety of sources such as crowdsurfing and social media; quickly and efficiently write, edit, and record audio and video. This course will explore these new delivery systems and provide guided practice of emerging communication forms. Fundamentally, this course is about writing—concisely and accurately with a clear and active voice—for new digital media with a focus on the personal narrative.
outcome: Students will be able to write, edit and produce both personal narratives and community based research topics in essay, podcast and short video documentary formats., Students will be able to collaborate, and share written and produced content with the class in the form of audio/visual and oral presentations., Students will be able to express their diverse perspectives., 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: COMM 3020
class title: Science Writing for the Media
description: How to write about science, technology, and medicine for the media. Writing assignments focus on writing news for web sites, blogs, magazines, and other media.
outcome: Students will be able to define science news., Students will be able to identify audiences for science news and target your writing to them., Students will be able to write basic science news stories., Students will be able to report and write science feature stories., Students will be able to explain key constraints on and opportunities for science journalism, including changes in science journalism as it adapts to a new media world., Students will be able to investigate current topics of concern to the science journalism community., Students will be able to discuss the social context in which science journalism operates., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion at least one college-level writing course.

class: COMM 3050
class title: Advanced Media Writing about Cultural, Social, and Environmental Crises
description: This advance writing course will tackle today's top cultural issues, such as climate change, social justice, social media, political extremism and others, with the ultimate goal of student publication. Students will first research a media market of their choice, preferably their home market, and then create compelling media content for identified local or regional media outlets. The media content will focus on the local or regional impacts of national or global cultural crises to highlight the impact on communities. A hoped-for, but not required, outcome of the course is for students to get one piece published in their target market. Students must have strong writing skills, be self-disciplined about making deadlines, be proactive and have an interest in publishing. Advanced media writing, op-editorial, and creative non-fiction will be covered.
outcome: Hone project-management skills through conception, research, writing, and publication with short deadlines., Conduct effective interviews., Develop proficient editing skills by evaluating and editing their work and others., Apply communication research to create compelling content., Create publishable content in popular media formats for mass-market consumption., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: an A- or better in COMM 2310 or equivalent course, experience with media writing and/or strong writing skills.

class: COMM 3065
class title: Sports Communication: Media, Marketing, Crisis and Violence
description: This course will introduce the student to various aspects of the sports-media-audience relationship, including the history of sports and the media, the industries that constitute sports media, the audiences drawn to and affected by sports media, and the social issues that arise from sports media. It will organized around three modules: Industry, Issues &amp; Careers.
outcome: Distinguish between various sports communication professions., Identify pressing issues around professional and amateur sports and how they might affect cultures on the whole., Critically evaluate a wide variety of sports and global sporting events with respect to media coverage., Design a communication plan for a sports media crisis., Propose an advertising plan for sports-related products or services using communication theories. 6. Demonstrate oral communication and interview skills., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: COMM 3070
class title: Communicating Today: Strategic Visual Messages
description: In many career fields, the ability to translate complex issues into compelling messages is an important professional skill. This requires knowledge of information gathering, message strategy and product selection. In this course, students pick a topic of personal interest and create strategic communication using four of the following popular traditional and multimedia formats: press release, fact sheet, blog, webpage, news story, op-editorial, audio slideshow, short video. Research continues through the semester as needs for facts and colorful content are identified with each product. Students learn effective use of data, narrative, commentary, storytelling, images, and message enhancement. Students are encouraged, but not required, to select topics related to science or sustainability. Class covers communicating about hot-button issues, such as climate change. Instructor will help students identify venues for publications.
outcome: Develop an in-depth understanding of a current policy, science or technology issue', using both primary and secondary sources of information, exploring cultural contexts, and managing projects from beginning to end., Present complex information with clear and compelling written, oral and visual forms of modern communication, utilizing new media and traditional media formats, for general and specific audiences., Demonstrate evidence-based communication techniques through integrating, synthesizing and summarizing qualitative and quantitative information., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2310 or COMM 2010 or permission of instructor.

class: COMM 3110
class title: Educational Psychology
description: Educational psychology is the application of psychological principles and concepts to cases of teaching and learning. We study behavioral, cognitive, embodied, and social-cultural perspectives on learning and thinking, and we use them in planning and reflecting on weekly fieldwork outside the classroom. In the process, we become more mindful and skilled learners ourselves and better facilitators of others' learning.
outcome: Be able to analyze and improve instructional materials and methods in terms of their ... Appropriateness for a given learning goal Demands on memory Demands on attention Demands on their ability to process the language of instruction Assumptions about the level of intellectual abstraction that learners are capable of Potential to activate learner motivation, Be more efficient and effective at reading, summarizing, and asking critical questions about peer-reviewed original research in educational psychology, Be more comfortable and skilled at facilitating learning for another person (through questioning, listening, and observing learners at work), 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: COMM 3140
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: COMM 3189
class title: Taking America's Pulse: Creating and Conducting a National Opinion Poll
description: In this course, students will design, conduct, and analyze a national-level public opinion survey. Students will determine all survey questions based on their research interests. All necessary survey research skills will be learned in the class.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: COMM 3210
class title: Communication and the Environment
description: Students investigate how values, attitudes, social structure, and communication affect public perceptions of environmental risk and public opinion about the environment. A primary focus is mass media's impact on public perceptions of the environment, how the media portray the environment, and discussion of the implications of public consumption of environmental content.
outcome: Students will examine the different ways that communication and the media shaped and continue to shape our understanding of and relationships to the natural environment., Students will gain historical and contemporary knowledge of the US conservation and environmental movements and how environmental attitudes have changed over time., Students will be able to apply communication theory to environmental contexts and will be better able to recognize, analyze, and critique the variety of environmental messages that they encounter., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: COMM 3450
class title: Human-Computer Interaction Design
description: This course focuses on user experience design (UX) and the life cycle of interface design from the user perspective. We will discuss key aspects of the human-centered design process: understanding, analyzing, and formalizing user needs, exploring possible design solutions to address user needs, creating prototypes to externalize design ideas, and evaluating the usability of these prototypes.
outcome: Students will be able to appraise the human-centered design cycle and human-computer interaction design concepts., Students will be able to build practical skills required to apply the human-centered design process in technology design through class activities and a semester-long project., Students will be able to design a user interface in a semester-long project, including interim milestones that walk the students through the specific stages of the design process., Students will be able to develop teamwork skills through a semester-long group project., 

class: COMM 3760
class title: Planning Communication Campaigns
description: Provides a theoretical and practical overview of the audiences, messages, and evaluation of communication campaigns. The course considers common methods of data collection (e.g. in-depth interviews, surveys) and analysis of campaign-related data sources. Specific topics include: (1) campaign goals, objectives, strategies, and tactics; (2) research design and implementation; (3) audience segmentation; (4) message construction; and (5) techniques of evaluation.
outcome: Students will be able to identify key principles involved with the design, implementation and evaluation of public communication campaigns., Students will be able to evaluate existing communication campaigns based on criteria learned throughout the course., Students will be able to apply a variety of research methodologies, including unobtrusive observation, in-depth interviews and/or surveys, to inform an original communication campaign proposal., Students will be able to apply communication theory to justify and develop campaign messages that are likely to be effective in reaching campaign objectives among targeted audiences., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: COMM 2820 or equivalent research methods course, and a course in basic statistics.

class: COMM 3800
class title: Television in the Digital Age
description: What is television? Drawing on key concepts in the field of television studies, this class will critically appraise the medium of television in our contemporary digital context. We will look at transformations in television production, genres, and audiences in response to new technologies and economies. By the end of the class, we will decide whether "television" is still a meaningful term and, if so, how its meanings must expand to account for our changing televisual practices. By the end of the course, you will have deepened your understanding of television and its relation to contemporary culture as well as developed a scholarly understanding of some key ideas that have structured television studies since its emergence as a field of study in the mid-1970s.
outcome: Recognize the role of digital technologies in changing television environments., Evaluate the impacts of technological, economic, industrial, and cultural transformations in television on programming content., Apply contemporary critiques of television industries to ongoing transformations in the production and reception of programming., Consider the meaning of "television" in a multiple-platform distribution model., Create a television show pitch and pilot script that demonstrate an understanding of contemporary television production, distribution, financing, genre, and audience., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2200.

class: COMM 4260
class title: Gender and Media
description: This seminar addresses the intersection of communication, culture, and identity through an examination of gender and the U.S. media system. After introducing students to key approaches to studying gender and mediated communication, the course will cover topics in four subunits: (1). Mediated representations of gender, sexuality, and intersectionality; (2). Diversity in media industries and gendered labor markets; (3). Gendered audiences and fan cultures; and (4). Gender, power, and identity in a digital era of communication. We will explore these topics through literature from sociology, communication and media studies, cultural studies, feminist theory, and internet/new media studies.
outcome: Students will be able to interpret key theories and methods of studying media, power, and social identities., Students will be able to examine the role of media in constructing gender and its intersections with race, ethnicity, class, and sexuality., Students will be able to recognize the importance of diversity in media industries., Students will be able to address the role of new media technologies in challenging and/or reaffirming traditional constructions of gender., Students will be able to develop critical thinking, writing, and analytic skills through the production of an original research paper., Students will be able to become more responsible consumers—and future producers—of media texts and imagery., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: COMM 4300
class title: Ethics in New Media, Technology, and Communication
description: This course examines moral and ethical issues in communication, new media, and technology. Using theories and research in moral philosophy and psychology, we examine how people perceive and reason about ethical issues presented by media and technology, and how moral action is influenced by cognitive, emotional, and ethical belief systems. Issues of autonomy, transparency, harm, privacy, manipulation, justice, democracy, equality, and care are discussed. We analyze the consistency between personal and professional ethics, the importance of moral character and agency, and the translation of moral thought to ethical action, and address the development of professional and personal ethical codes of conduct and research for communication professionals in the areas of new media and technology.
outcome: Students will be able to increase awareness of moral and ethical issues in media, technology, and communication., Students will be able to explain moral psychology and ethical principles., Students will be able to examine moral reasoning and ethical responsibilities—both personal and professional—that affect people and society., Students will be able to examine issues and implications of ethical relativism and ethical principles., Students will be able to reason thoughtfully and ethically about current cases and news items in communication, media, and technology., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: COMM 4500
class title: Language and Technology
description: Examines how new communication technologies affect the way we produce and understand language and modify interaction with one another. Focuses on the collaborative nature of language use and how Internet technologies affect the joint activities of speakers and listeners during the construction of meaning in conversation
outcome: Demonstrate a detailed understanding of theoretical perspectives, through careful reading and discussion of class materials., Apply theories and methods from class to research projects., Demonstrate organizational and collaborative skills through group research projects., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2450/INFO 2450 or permission of instructor.

class: COMM 4760
class title: Population Health Communication
description: This senior-level undergraduate seminar provides an overview of theory and research on communication related to population health, including strategic efforts to impact health behavior and structural environments that support health, media portrayals of health issues, and news coverage of health and social policy with impacts on the health and distribution of health in populations. Topics include: theories of behavior change and message effects, campaigns to improve behavioral and structural determinants of health, the intersection of health and politics, and implications of changes in media platforms for population health campaigns and research.
outcome: Students will be able to interpret major theories that try to explain variation in (a) health-related behavior among individuals and larger social units, and (b) responses to health-related messages designed to promote behavior or policy change., Students will be able to analyze the implications of those theories for the potential role of public health communication in changing behavior., Students will be able to evaluate the credibility of the evidence for the effectiveness of prominent, historical examples of public health communication programs in the US and abroad., Students will be able to evaluate evidence for effects of other forms of public communication relating to health (advertising, news coverage, media programming) on health and policy outcomes., Students will be able to synthesize knowledge and skills learned in outcomes (1) through (4) to develop a systematic review of research in an area of interest., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2820.

class: COMM 4940
class title: Special Topics in Communication
description: Study of topics in communication not otherwise provided by a department course and determined by the interest of faculty members and students. Please check department website for most up-to-date offerings.

class: COMM 4950
class title: Communication Industries: NYComm
description: This seminar will introduce students to the world of professional communication. Students will meet communication alumni working in media, technology, public relations, advertising, brand management, marketing, and civil service. Students will learn about alumni roles in the changing the professional communication landscape. Students will create a resume and learn interview skills, in addition to preparing an ePortfolio. At the end of the 7-week seminar, students will travel to New York City for three days to meet with alumni working in the communication fields. Previous companies visited include: Nintendo, NBCUniversal, Social Code, M Booth, AMC, OXO and the United Nations' Youth Global Leadership Foundation. The course will cover relevant background information about each company prior to the trip and will include Skype meetings with other communication and media firms before the trip to NYC, which occurs the week after Cornell's Fall Break.
outcome: Identify the roles of each firm in the communication industry, its challenges, and key drivers for the future., Discuss professional opportunities with working alumni through a variety of networking channels., Evaluate yourself navigating a career within communication industries., Construct and present an ePortfolio which demonstrates key communicative skills., Evaluate how communication industries can contribute to sustainable development goals., 

class: COMM 4960
class title: Communication Internship
description: Students receive a structured, on-the-job learning experience under the supervision of communication professionals in cooperating organizations. A minimum of 60 hours of on-the-job work is required; the number of work hours beyond 60 is left to the discretion of the intern and the supervising company. A final project linking communication theory to practical work experience is required. All internships must be approved by the internship coordinator before the work experience segment. All COMM 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at cals.cornell.edu/academics/student-research/internship. For more information about registering for credit and COMM 4960, please see https://communication.cals.cornell.edu/undergraduate-program/internship-information-0. 
outcome: Identify and reflect on professional goals for their internship., Apply and develop communication skills in a professional setting., Integrate communication theory and experience in communication-related professions., 

class: COMM 4970
class title: Individual Study in Communication
description: Individual study under faculty supervision. Work should concentrate on locating, assimilating, synthesizing, and reporting existing knowledge on a selected topic. Attempts to implement this knowledge in a practical application are desirable.

class: COMM 4980
class title: Communication Teaching Experience
description: Periodic meetings with the instructor cover realization of course objectives, evaluation of teaching methods, and student feedback. In addition to aiding with the actual instruction, each student prepares a paper on some aspect of the course.

class: COMM 4990
class title: Independent Research
description: Permits outstanding students to conduct laboratory or field research in communication under appropriate faculty supervision. The research should be scientific: systematic, controlled, empirical. Research goals should include description, prediction, explanation, or policy orientation and should generate new knowledge.

class: COMM 5300
class title: Ethics in New Media, Technology, and Communication
description: This course examines moral and ethical issues in communication, new media, and technology. Using theories and research in moral philosophy and psychology, we examine how people perceive and reason about ethical issues presented by media and technology, and how moral action is influenced by cognitive, emotional, and ethical belief systems. Issues of autonomy, transparency, harm, privacy, manipulation, justice, democracy, equality, and care are discussed. We analyze the consistency between personal and professional ethics, the importance of moral character and agency, and the translation of moral thought to ethical action, and address the development of professional and personal ethical codes of conduct and research for communication professionals in the areas of new media and technology.
outcome: Students will be able to increase awareness of moral and ethical issues in media, technology, and communication., Students will be able to explain moral psychology and ethical principles., Students will be able to examine moral reasoning and ethical responsibilities—both personal and professional—that affect people and society., Students will be able to examine issues and implications of ethical relativism and ethical principles., Students will be able to reason thoughtfully and ethically about current cases and news items in communication, media, and technology., 

class: COMM 5660
class title: Science Communication Workshop
description: This weekend workshop trains researchers in the sciences (including natural sciences, engineering, experimental social sciences, etc.) to communicate effectively with nonscientists such as policy makers, political stakeholders, the media, and the general public. Training activities may include role-play, reading/discussion, writing press releases and other outreach materials, and discussion with invited speakers.
outcome: Students will be aware of multiple opportunities for communicating with public audiences., Students will be able to use multiple skills used in communicating with public audiences., Students will have acquired basic tools for writing and speaking for public audiences., 

class: COMM 6310
class title: Behavior and Information Technology
description: This course explores the behavioral foundations of communication technology and the information sciences, and the ways in which theories and methods from the behavioral sciences play a role in understanding people's use of, access to and interactions with information and communication technologies.

class: COMM 6500
class title: Language and Technology
description: Examines how new communication technologies affect the way we produce and understand language and modify interaction with one another. Focuses on the collaborative nature of language use and how Internet technologies affect the joint activities of speakers and listeners during the construction of meaning in conversation.
outcome: Demonstrate a detailed understanding of theoretical perspectives, through careful reading and discussion of class materials., Apply theories and methods from class to research projects., Demonstrate organizational and collaborative skills through group research projects., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2450/INFO 2450 or permission of instructor.

class: COMM 6800
class title: Studies in Communication
description: Reviews classical and contemporary readings in communication, including key concepts and areas of investigation. Explores the scope of the field, the interrelationships of its various branches, and examines the role of theory in the research process.
outcome: Identify major theoretical perspectives, domains of research, and contexts of focus in the field of communication., Describe the research interests of our faculty, their general areas of research, and their theoretical approaches., Integrate theory and epistemological practice in an area of the discipline to inform their research trajectory in the field., 

class: COMM 6820
class title: Quantitative Research Methods
description: Analyzes methods of communication research based on a social science foundation. Goals are to understand processes and rationales for qualitative, textual, survey, and experimental methods. Students gain experience with some of these methods through modest individual or group research projects and critiques of selected contemporary communication studies.
outcome: Students will be able to conduct and evaluate empirical research in the field of communication., 

class: COMM 6840
class title: Theory & Research in Group Comm & Decision Making
description: Graduate seminar focusing on theory and research in communication and decision-making in small groups. Emphasis is on task-oriented groups. Topics include information exchange, decision-making processes, types of tasks, social influence, group development processes, group support systems, intergroup processes, and leadership. Special attention is given to methodological challenges in group research.
outcome: Students will be able to review theory related task group processes and outcomes., Students will be able to evaluate methodological challenges unique to the study of groups and teams and appropriate methodological tools., Students will be able to develop ideas for new directions of research contribution to understanding group processes and performance., Students will be able to integrate insights on group processes and outcomes across multiple disciplines., 

class: COMM 7970
class title: Graduate Independent Study
description: Individual study concentrating on locating, assimilating, synthesizing, and reporting existing knowledge on a selected topic.

class: COMM 7990
class title: Graduate Research
description: Small-group or individual research based on original, empirical, data-based designs regarding topical issues in communication not otherwise examined in a graduate field course.

class: COMM 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Dissertation Research
description: Dissertation research for Ph.D. candidates.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of "A" exam required.

class: CRP 1103
class title: Observing the City: Introduction to Field-Based Analysis
description: This course offers an introduction to data gathering, analysis and writing methods used in urban studies, planning, sociology, and geography. The class will draw on active learning techniques to build skills in systematic observations in public, visualization, collaborative data collection, concept mapping, analysis, and writing. The course offers student opportunities to apply these methods outside the classroom.

class: CRP 1106
class title: Advising Seminar: MentURS
description: The First Year Advising Seminar is designed to help first year and transfer students transition to Cornell and introduce them to studying in the Urban and Regional Studies Program. The course will be led by the first year advising team along with peer upper-level URS students.

class: CRP 1109
class title: FWS: Cities and Regions
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is devoted to topics related to cities and regions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: CRP 2100
class title: Neighborhood Change in the City: Quantitative Methods
description: This course integrates debates on housing, neighborhood change, and urban inequality with quantitative methods. Housing is a contradiction: It is simultaneously a place where we live and access a range of neighborhood opportunities as well as a commodity that is bought and sold for speculation and profit. We will examine institutional, social, and economic contexts across time that shape the fundamental question: Who has the right to live in the city? This course also introduces students to quantitative methods, mapping, and visualization to explore the factors that shape housing outcomes, urban segregation, and neighborhood opportunity.

class: CRP 3000
class title: MentURS I
description: This course provides valuable peer mentoring to first-year URS students, including guidance and advice related to academics, extracurricular activities, and social life so that they may feel more connected and comfortable navigating and accessing all that Cornell, AAP, and CRP have to offer. CRP 3000 is the first part of a two-part course; students must complete both CRP 3000 and CRP 3001 to receive credit.

class: CRP 3072
class title: Land Use, Environmental Planning, and Urban Design Workshop
description: Land Use and Environmental Planning workshop courses focus on the forces and actions that directly affect the physical character, transformation, rehabilitation, and preservation of natural landscapes, cities, and regions. Participants provide technical assistance to communities, and have the opportunity to work with communities in resolving critical planning issues. Topics may include development of land use and natural conservation plans, community redevelopment plans, design and analysis of public spaces, and strategies for making communities more environmentally and economically sustainable.

class: CRP 3074
class title: Economic and Community Development Workshop
description: Economic and Community Development workshop courses focus on the economics of neighborhoods, cities, and regions with the intent of producing more informed and effective economic development policy. Topics of study include, among others, the application of analytical tools needed to produce first-rate economic development plans, the special needs of excluded, poor and segregated communities, use of quantitative and qualitative methods to address social inequalities, the politics of planning, relationships between economic development and community development.

class: CRP 3076
class title: International Planning and Development Workshop
description: The workshop exposes students to the complexity as well as the nuances of planning in international contexts. It places a strong emphasis on an engaged model of learning, research and planning practice. An important part of the workshop is building effective working relationships across cultures, disciplinary perspectives and professional orientations. The workshop emphasizes the use of diverse sources of data and information, and effective communication of deliverables. Because the workshop responds to the needs of international collaborators and stakeholders, the substantive focus of the workshop and the deliverables changes from one year to the next. In recent years the workshop has focused on issues related to poverty, water, shelter and participatory planning.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the city form and its evolution., Students will be able to understand the basic principles of urban design and/or community development., Students will be able to understand metrics/methods for analyzing environmental sustainability and economic development/governance in the urban context., Students will be able to apply knowledge gained in lectures and class discussions to conduct a community-oriented project or create a master plan for developing or redeveloping a site., 

class: CRP 3170
class title: Economic Development: Goals, Strategies and Tools
description: This course examines the theory and practice of economic and community development with special attention to understanding the relationship between goals, strategies policy tools for building the local economy and improving economic wellbeing and quality of life for residents.  While this course is designed to primarily focus on economic development, it is based on the understanding that community and economic development are highly intertwined.  The enhancement of human and organizational productivity is closely interwoven with efforts to strengthen community, shape the physical environment and protect and restore the ecological base on which the community and local economy depends.  The course focuses on municipalities and regions, but we recognize that all actors are embedded within state, national and international systems involving public and private entities. We will also talk with practitioners and work with professional policy documents to understand how on-the-ground decisions are made.  Finally, we will learn some of the basic skills used by economic development practitioners and some of the fundamental issues facing local governments.
outcome: Recognize and understand common economic development goals, strategies, and tools used by community and economic development practitioners., Critically evaluate economic development approaches taken by different cities and communities., Understand the opportunities and constraints that affect a city's ability to implement appropriate economic development tools., Understand and assess planners' and economic developers' roles and responsibilities in implementing economic development plans and policies., Create a realistic and context-sensitive policy proposal, white paper, or conceptual plan that addresses an economic development challenge or opportunity., Understand and practice principles of active listening, collaborative discussion, and Socratic dialogue., 

class: CRP 3171
class title: Visual Communication and Analysis in Urban Design: Software Training for Urban Designers
description: The core concept of this course is to provide a step-by-step introduction to utilizing design software to collect and analyze the complex GIS data for neighborhood-scale projects, and create diagrams, drawings, and maps for urban design/ planning practices. The students will be introduced to industry-standard programs including ArcGIS ArcMap/ StoryMaps, Adobe InDesign/ Illustrator/ Photoshop, Google Earth Pro, and Rhino 3D. This course is structured to support AAP NYC courses, especially NYC Studio (CRP 5173) and the NYC Workshop (CRP 5172). This hands-on software training will develop visual communication skills essential to successful urban planners/ designers by learning how to represent research findings and design ideas within multi-disciplinary team settings. This course introduces the extensive NYC resources such as open data portals, helpful websites for mapping, demographics, zoning and land use, infrastructure, community needs, development patterns, environmental reports, etc.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CRP 5172 and CRP 5173.

class: CRP 3201
class title: Research Design and Qualitative Methods
description: Researchers and practitioners in the field of international studies and planning often conduct qualitative research to understand the impacts of and people's experiences with development and planning projects. Then, how do we produce effective qualitative research questions? What data should we gather to address those questions? What methods should we use? How do we prepare for field research? How do we process and analyze the collected data? How do we link literature, research questions, methods, and data to formulate arguments and make conclusions? Throughout the semester, we will address these questions through lecturers, in-class activities, method exercises, and data analysis workshops. 

class: CRP 3270
class title: Regional Economic Impact Analysis
description: This course defines the context of a regional economy, taking a systems approach to sustainable development planning. Students will be introduced to the techniques of input-output analysis and will learn how to use social accounting models to evaluate social and environmental impacts. We will use international datasets and will also learn IMPLAN, a software and database designed to quantify the impact of exogenous forces on U.S. regions. Examples of exogenous forces include out-migration of population, natural disasters, financial flows, or the introduction of new activities. The course methods enable practicing professionals to integrate environmental and social dimensions of planning into the framework of economic impact analysis.

class: CRP 3348
class title: Design Connect
description: Design Connect Workshop is the for-credit option for students participating in the local and regional projects solicited, reviewed and executed by the independent student organization of the same name. It provides planning and design services to upstate New York communities. Student teams engage community partners to create conceptual designs, with research and analysis, participatory visioning and design charrettes, town and master planning for public spaces. Course can be repeated for credit.

class: CRP 3555
class title: Environmental Impact Review
description: Environmental impact review has evolved and expended in its use and influence in public decision-making at the federal, state, and local levels. New York, with its State Environmental Quality Review process, has had a robust environmental impact review process for four decades. This course is an introductory exploration of environmental impact review in theory and practice, with emphasis on practice in New York.

class: CRP 3850
class title: Special Topics in Planning
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of planning. Topics vary each semester. 

class: CRP 3900
class title: City and Regional Futures: Planning Practice, Policy and Design
description: This colloquium brings domestic and international experts to Cornell to talk about research and practice aimed at shaping the future of communities and regions. It includes an array of topics that span urban policy, planning practice and research, design, and applied research on technology and society. Course can be repeated for credit.

class: CRP 4080
class title: Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
description: Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have revolutionized the way we manage, analyze, and present spatial information. This course focuses on GIS in the social sciences. Many of the exercises and examples are based on planning issues, but the concepts can be applied to many other disciplines such as government, economics, natural resources, and sociology. Some of the issues covered include fundamentals of spatial analysis; overview of GIS technology and applications; designing a GIS project; gathering and analyzing data; and creating thematic maps.

class: CRP 4120
class title: Urban Public Management
description: Local governments across the world face challenges of infrastructure and service delivery in the context of fiscal constraints. Innovations often involve devolution and privatization. Scholarly research debates whether these market approaches promote efficiency, regional equity, local economic growth and citizen voice. Students will review the theoretical bases for these claims and the empirical evidence from around the world. Students will write theory papers as well as engage in group work on practical policy questions facing cities.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: CRP 4280
class title: Mapping and Countermapping
description: This hybrid practice-discourse course introduces students to the ideas, debates and practices in critical cartography and digital geography. How, who and towards what purposes are spatial relationships represented through maps? We will approach mapping with an emphasis on the ethos of countermapping to make more legible those perspectives, claims and epistemologies that are generally underrepresented. We will discuss how new mapping technologies and novel big data are shifting the mapping landscape, what new tensions and possibilities arise, and how these new tools supplant or reinforce existing power dynamics. Students will "read" and critique maps to understand the design, information, context surrounding the creation of the map. We will be learning tools and software to create our own narrative maps and countermaps, with the aim of using these in a final research project.   
outcome: Students will be able to read and critique maps and texts., Students will understand the discourse in mapping and countermapping literature., Students will develop an introductory-level understanding of QGIS, Mapbox GL, and Felt., Students will be able to clearly communicate a narrative through mapmaking, contextualization, textual description, and presentation that demonstrates multiple ways of understanding a spatial question in urban development., 

class: CRP 4331
class title: Environmental Law and Policy
description: Environmental law deals with some of today's most pressing challenges. In the fifty years since 1972, when the first World Conference on the Environment was held in Stockholm, and the US Clean Water Act was amended, the field of environmental law and policy has become increasingly sophisticated and complex. Regulation of environmental harms has long been a focus of governmental effort. Over the past half century, however, societies have come to recognize that they must adopt controls on pollution to protect the air, ground, water, atmosphere, and the natural world. Environmental law also increasingly touches on energy, agriculture, and land use law, and has expanded to include a focus on corporate law, international trade, environmental governance, environmental justice, sustainable growth and development, and climate change. In this course, we will look at the major statutes and policies used, at both the federal and state levels, to protect humans and the environment against exposure to harmful substances, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, CERLCA (Superfund), Resource Conservation &amp; Recovery Act, Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), and approaches to protecting endangered species and ecosystems. We will also examine the challenges of global atmospheric pollution, including ozone depletion and climate change. The class will look not only at the substance of these laws and policies, but also review common-law litigation, enforcement challenges, and the role of market mechanisms in addressing environmental issues. Students will become familiar with the history of environmental law and will analyze important landmark cases, as well as the hierarchy of laws, and jurisdictions that shape environmental law and policy. Students will apply their knowledge to real examples, with the goal of developing innovative legal solutions for the critical environmental challenges facing our world today.

class: CRP 4660
class title: OURS Urban Field Trip
description: Students participate in field study of city planning, preservation, economic and community development, and real estate issues in a large eastern U.S. city.  Preparatory lecture(s) and a brief summary essay are required.

class: CRP 4770
class title: Seminar on Issues in African Development
description: Examines a broad range of critical concerns in contemporary Africa including food production, human resource development, migration, urbanization, environmental resource management, economic growth, and policy guidance. The weekly presentations are made by invited specialists. Students write weekly memos about the talks.
outcome: To learn about African development, people, cultures and societies and explore development theories with their alternative viewpoints related to a specific theme., To explore alternative viewpoints and exchange ideas on different African development-related topics., To strengthen written and oral skills in synthesis of and reflection on readings, seminars and discussions., 

class: CRP 4900
class title: Student-Faculty Research
description: Research, reading, and/or writing project in which a student and faculty member choose a topic related to urban and regional studies.

class: CRP 4920
class title: Undergraduate Honors Thesis Research
description: Honors students conduct research to prepare a thesis on a topic of their own choosing under the direction of a faculty member. 

class: CRP 4930
class title: Undergraduate Honors Thesis Writing
description: Honors students prepare a thesis on a topic of their own choosing under the direction of a faculty member.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 4920.

class: CRP 4940
class title: URS Internship
description: Unpaid internships at a minimum of 160 hours for 2 credits; 80 hours for 1 credit. For one credit student must produce a 10 page paper that relates to the experience of the internship, and for 2 credits a 20 page paper due to adviser in the semester following the internship. 

class: CRP 4970
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent study classes are offered for variable credit, for up to a maximum of 4 credits and are applied as elective credits only. Enrollment requires the submission of an approved form.

class: CRP 5072
class title: Land Use, Environmental Planning, and Urban Design Workshop
description: Land Use and Environmental Planning workshop courses focus on the forces and actions that directly affect the physical character, transformation, rehabilitation, and preservation of natural landscapes, cities, and regions. Participants provide technical assistance to communities, and have the opportunity to work with communities in resolving critical planning issues. Topics may include development of land use and natural conservation plans, community redevelopment plans, design and analysis of public spaces, and strategies for making communities more environmentally and economically sustainable.

class: CRP 5074
class title: Economic and Community Development Workshop
description: Economic and Community Development workshop courses focus on the economics of neighborhoods, cities, and regions with the intent of producing more informed and effective economic development policy. Topics of study include, among others, the application of analytical tools needed to produce first-rate economic development plans, the special needs of excluded, poor and segregated communities, use of quantitative and qualitative methods to address social inequalities, the politics of planning, relationships between economic development and community development.

class: CRP 5076
class title: International Planning and Development Workshop
description: The workshop exposes students to the complexity as well as the nuances of planning with poor communities in the Global South. It places a strong emphasis on an engaged model of learning, research and planning practice. An important part of the workshop is building effective working relationships across cultures, disciplinary perspectives and professional orientations. The workshop emphasizes the use of diverse sources of data and information, and effective communication of deliverables. Because the workshop responds to the needs of international collaborators and stakeholders, the substantive focus of the workshop and the deliverables changes from one year to the next. In recent years the workshop has focused on issues related to poverty, water, shelter and participatory planning.

class: CRP 5080
class title: Introduction to GIS for Planners
description: This course is designed to provide students with a conceptual understanding of geographic information systems (GIS) and sciences, practical hands on experience with GIS software, and understanding of how GIS can be applied to planning practice and research. Students will be introduced to the basic concepts, structures, and functions of GIS as well as their applications and limitations.  By the end of this course students should be familiar with a range of available tools and methods to address planning related problems and issues, and be able to conceive of and manage a GIS project. This involves a) identifying a planning analysis/research problem that requires GIS data and spatial analysis to address/analyze the problem; and b) collecting, processing, and analyzing spatial data to interpret the findings.

class: CRP 5120
class title: Public and Spatial Economics for Planners
description: This courses covers the microeconomic theory necessary to understand the many applications of economics presented in subsequent courses you will take as a planning student. The primary learning goals of this course are (1) to understand the core concepts of microeconomics especially as they relate to planning issues and (2) to develop your analytical problem solving skills.  

class: CRP 5130
class title: Introduction to Planning Practice and History
description: This graduate lecture course provides a foundation on the theory and history of how cities are planned, developed, and governed. The first half explores why cities exist and how their economic, political, and imperial functions have shaped planning interventions, spatial and social inequality, and environmental outcomes. The second examines the major levers that governments can use to shape the urban condition, including land policy, social policy, infrastructure and natural resource policy, and planning processes. The course connects U.S. experiences with relational and comparative perspectives from around the world. Assignments emphasize training in reading, writing, and communication skills. 

class: CRP 5170
class title: Economic Development: Goals, Strategies and Tools
description: This course examines the theory and practice of economic and community development with special attention to understanding the relationship between goals, strategies policy tools for building the local economy and improving economic wellbeing and quality of life for residents.  While this course is designed to primarily focus on economic development, it is based on the understanding that community and economic development are highly intertwined.  The enhancement of human and organizational productivity is closely interwoven with efforts to strengthen community, shape the physical environment and protect and restore the ecological base on which the community and local economy depends.  The course focuses on municipalities and regions, but we recognize that all actors are embedded within state, national and international systems involving public and private entities. We will also talk with practitioners and work with professional policy documents to understand how on-the-ground decisions are made.  Finally, we will learn some of the basic skills used by economic development practitioners and some of the fundamental issues facing local governments.
outcome: Recognize and understand common economic development goals, strategies, and tools used by community and economic development practitioners., Critically evaluate economic development approaches taken by different cities and communities., Understand the opportunities and constraints that affect a city's ability to implement appropriate economic development tools., Understand and assess planners' and economic developers' roles and responsibilities in implementing economic development plans and policies., Create a realistic and context-sensitive policy proposal, white paper, or conceptual plan that addresses an economic development challenge or opportunity., Understand and practice principles of active listening, collaborative discussion, and Socratic dialogue., 

class: CRP 5171
class title: Visual Communication and Analysis in Urban Design: Software Training for Urban Designers
description: The core concept of this course is to provide a step-by-step introduction to utilizing design software to collect and analyze the complex GIS data for neighborhood-scale projects, and create diagrams, drawings, and maps for urban design/ planning practices. The students will be introduced to industry-standard programs including ArcGIS ArcMap/ StoryMaps, Adobe InDesign/ Illustrator/ Photoshop, Google Earth Pro, and Rhino 3D. This course is structured to support AAP NYC courses, especially NYC Studio (CRP 5173) and the NYC Workshop (CRP 5172). This hands-on software training will develop visual communication skills essential to successful urban planners/ designers by learning how to represent research findings and design ideas within multi-disciplinary team settings. This course introduces the extensive NYC resources such as open data portals, helpful websites for mapping, demographics, zoning and land use, infrastructure, community needs, development patterns, environmental reports, etc.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CRP 5172 and CRP 5173.

class: CRP 5172
class title: NYC Workshop: Land Use, Environmental Planning, and Design
description: This workshop examines the evolving structure of New York City and the way large-scale developments have influenced its form, patterns of growth, opportunities for economic development, value creation, and investment. The coursework and related tours examine the historical forces that have influenced New York City, including models of urban analysis, contemporary theories of urban design, environmental impact analysis, and implementation strategies used in redevelopment projects. Other American and international cities will be used as comparisons.

class: CRP 5173
class title: NYC Studio: Integrated Urbanism as a Platform for Engagement
description: This studio will dive deep into the complex balance between architecture and urbanism, policy and public housing, focusing in particular on campus of the New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) property.

class: CRP 5174
class title: NYC Colloquium: Professional Practice
description: This course examines the critical work of selected Cornell alumni from the College of Architecture, Art and Planning, specifically from the Department of City and Regional Planning and also from the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. The course explores the career trajectories development of alumni, and in some cases, their transitions into other professions as attorneys, educators, advocates, real estate developers, organizational consultants, etc.

class: CRP 5280
class title: Mapping and Countermapping
description: This hybrid practice-discourse course introduces students to the ideas, debates and practices in critical cartography and digital geography. How, who and towards what purposes are spatial relationships represented through maps? We will approach mapping with an emphasis on the ethos of countermapping to make more legible those perspectives, claims and epistemologies that are generally underrepresented. We will discuss how new mapping technologies and novel big data are shifting the mapping landscape, what new tensions and possibilities arise, and how these new tools supplant or reinforce existing power dynamics. Students will "read" and critique maps to understand the design, information, context surrounding the creation of the map. We will be learning tools and software to create our own narrative maps and countermaps, with the aim of using these in a final research project.  
outcome: Students will be able to read and critique maps and texts., Students will be able to understand the discourse in mapping and countermapping literature., Students will develop an introductory-level understanding of QGIS, Mapbox GL, and Felt., Students will be able to clearly communicate a narrative through mapmaking, contextualization, textual description, and presentation that demonstrates multiple ways of understanding a spatial question in urban development., 

class: CRP 5331
class title: Environmental Law and Policy
description: In this course, we will look at the major statutes and policies used to protect humans and the environment from exposure to harmful substances, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, CERLCA (Superfund), Resource Conservation &amp; Recovery Act, and approaches to protecting endangered species and ecosystems. We will also examine the challenges of protecting the global commons, including from ozone depletion, plastics pollution, and climate change. The class will look not only at the substance of these laws and policies, but also review common-law litigation, and issues with implementation and enforcement. Students will become familiar with the history of environmental law and will analyze important landmark cases, as well as the hierarchy of laws, and jurisdictions that shape environmental law and policy. Students will apply their knowledge to real examples, with the goal of understanding the possibilities and limits of legal and policy solutions to address the critical environmental challenges facing our world today.

class: CRP 5348
class title: Design Connect
description: Design Connect Workshop is the for-credit option for students participating in the local and regional projects solicited, reviewed and executed by the independent student organization of the same name.  It provides planning and design services to upstate New York communities. Student teams engage community partners to create conceptual designs, with research and analysis, participatory visioning and design charrettes, town and master planning for public spaces. Course can be repeated for credit.

class: CRP 5370
class title: Real Estate Seminar Series
description: Designed to bring students weekly into direct contact with real-estate professionals mainly through the use of videoconferences originating from locations around the world.

class: CRP 5450
class title: Inferential Statistics for Planning and Public Policy
description: This course is an introduction to the inferential statistical methods and econometrics/regression analysis needed to understand empirical public policy and planning research and to do basic applied policy analysis. The statistical concepts are illustrated using data and examples primarily from the fields of public policy and planning.

class: CRP 5555
class title: Environmental Impact Review
description: Environmental impact review has evolved and expended in its use and influence in public decision-making at the federal, state, and local levels. New York, with its State Environmental Quality Review process, has had a robust environmental impact review process for four decades. This course is an introductory exploration of environmental impact review in theory and practice, with emphasis on practice in New York.

class: CRP 5560
class title: Creating the Built Environment
description: Real estate professionals and city and regional planners play a vital role in creating the built environment. Understanding the physical form of real estate, and the rules that govern that form, is critically important if one is to meaningfully engage in the practice of real estate development. In this course, we examine in detail the physical form of the built environment, and students gain an understanding of the principles and organizing strategies that underlie it. We examine the following building types in depth: residential, retail, hotel and mixed use. Students exit this course with a deeper understanding of why the built environment takes the shape it does and the opportunities for innovations.

class: CRP 5561
class title: Innovation and Strategy in Commercial Real Estate Development
description: In this course, we will examine in detail the physical form of workplace design and the specific principles and organizing strategies that affect it. We address the history of office building design, current trends in workplace culture and new forms of office space. We discuss issues affecting office building design, including environmental sustainability, building efficiency, building code and construction, and leasing and operations. Students exit the course with a deeper understanding of why the built environment takes the shape it does and the opportunities for innovation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 5560.  

class: CRP 5600
class title: Documentation for Preservation
description: Methods of identifying, recording, collecting, processing, and analyzing information dealing with historic and architecturally significant structures, sites, and objects. Students are assigned common problems in documentation at various scales and propose solutions.

class: CRP 5610
class title: Historic Preservation Planning Workshop: Surveys
description: Covers techniques for the preparation of surveys of historic structures and districts; identification of American architectural styles, focusing on local historical resources, state and federal historic preservation guidance. Lectures and training sessions emphasize cross cultural training with individuals and community organizations.

class: CRP 5620
class title: Perspectives on Preservation
description: Introduction to the theory, history, and practice of Historic Preservation Planning in America, with an emphasis on understanding the development and implementation of a preservation project. The course discusses projects ranging in scale and character from individual buildings to districts to cultural landscapes; as well as topics such as preservation economics, government regulations, significance and authenticity, and the politics of identifying and conserving cultural and natural resources.

class: CRP 5660
class title: Planning and Preservation Practice: Urban Field Trip
description: Students participate in field study of city planning, preservation, economic and community development, and real estate issues in large eastern U.S. cities. Preparatory lecture(s) and a brief summary essay are required.

class: CRP 5662
class title: Planning and Preservation Practice: Preservation National Conference
description: Students participate in a 4-day national preservation conference.

class: CRP 5670
class title: Measured Drawing
description: Presents the basic techniques of studying, sketching, and measuring a building and the preparation of a finished drawing set according to Historic American Building Survey standards. Techniques taught include hand drawing, AutoCAD, and other relevant skills and software. Students will prepare individually, or in small groups, comprehensive graphic documentation for a property.

class: CRP 5850
class title: Special Topics
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to planning. Topics vary each semester.

class: CRP 5861
class title: Graphic Communications
description: This course focuses on the fundamentals of graphic communication and planning industry standard computer programs such as: Google Earth, Auto CAD, SketchUp, Illustrator, Photoshop and InDesign via exercises related to physical planning and urban design. Enhance your ability to compose images and text, utilize color pallets, fonts and create design layouts in order to deliver effective and successful presentations. This course is designed for mature undergraduate and graduate students in urban planning, landscape architecture, real estate and related fields, who desire to possess a competitive edge when applying for jobs and/or participate in multi-disciplinary design competitions, and/or wish to learn how to communicate ideas in a clear and appealing way to a diversity of audiences. The concepts learned in the course will be developed through laboratory work and evolved via the production of in class exercises, collective knowledge development assignments, and a final board presentation.

class: CRP 6120
class title: Urban Public Management
description: Local governments across the world face challenges of infrastructure and service delivery in the context of fiscal constraints. Innovations often involve devolution and privatization. Scholarly research debates whether these market approaches promote efficiency, regional equity, local economic growth and citizen voice. Students will review the theoretical bases for these claims and the empirical evidence from around the world. Students will write theory papers as well as engage in group work on practical policy questions facing cities.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: CRP 6201
class title: Research Design and Qualitative Methods
description: Researchers and practitioners in the field of international studies and planning often conduct qualitative research to understand the impacts of and people's experiences with development and planning projects. Then, how do we produce effective qualitative research questions? What data should we gather to address those questions? What methods should we use? How do we prepare for field research? How do we process and analyze the collected data? How do we link literature, research questions, methods, and data to formulate arguments and make conclusions? Throughout the semester, we will address these questions through lecturers, in-class activities, method exercises, and data analysis workshops. 

class: CRP 6270
class title: Regional Economic Impact Analysis
description: This course defines the context of a regional economy, taking a systems approach to sustainable development planning. Students will be introduced to the techniques of input-output analysis and will learn how to use social accounting models to evaluate social and environmental impacts. We will use international datasets and will also learn IMPLAN, a software and database designed to quantify the impact of exogenous forces on U.S. regions. Examples of exogenous forces include out-migration of population, natural disasters, financial flows, or the introduction of new activities. The course methods enable practicing professionals to integrate environmental and social dimensions of planning into the framework of economic impact analysis.

class: CRP 6580
class title: Residential and Commercial Development
description: Explores the residential and commercial-development process from site acquisition through delivery of the finished product. Topics include market feasibility, land planning and acquisition, product selection and design, project financing and feasibility, schedule and budgetary controls, contracting and construction, marketing, and sales activities. Composition of the development project team is discussed. Classes are supplemented by visiting professionals. The course includes a semester-long project based on an actual property and market opportunity.

class: CRP 6595
class title: Special Topics in Real Estate
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to real estate.  Topics vary each semester.

class: CRP 6630
class title: Historic Preservation Law
description: Overview of American legal system and the sources of law used to protect historic resources. The course considers the primary tools for preservation, including historic district and landmark designation, the use of the police power, taxation, and eminent domain. Instructors will also review recent developments in state and federal historic preservation.

class: CRP 6770
class title: Seminar on Issues in African Development
description: Examines a broad range of critical concerns in contemporary Africa including food production, human resource development, migration, urbanization, environmental resource management, economic growth, and policy guidance. The weekly presentations are made by invited specialists. Students write weekly memos about the talks. Graduate students (CRP 6770/GDEV 6770) facilitate one seminar question period.
outcome: To learn about African development, people, cultures and societies and explore development theories with their alternative viewpoints related to a specific theme., To explore alternative viewpoints and exchange ideas on different African development-related topics., To strengthen written and oral skills in synthesis of and reflection on readings, seminars and discussions., 

class: CRP 7850
class title: City and Regional Futures: Planning Practice, Policy and Design
description: This colloquium brings domestic and international experts to Cornell to talk about research and practice aimed at shaping the future of communities and regions. It includes an array of topics that span urban policy, planning practice and research, design, and applied research on technology and society. Course can be repeated for credit.

class: CRP 7940
class title: Planning Internship
description: Students participate in a structured, unpaid internship under the supervision of planning professionals in cooperating organizations. The internship should be purposeful, provide opportunities for reflection, present continual challenge to the student, and incorporate active learning. The faculty supervisor and student should outline the conditions of the work assignment, learning outcomes, and faculty supervision on an independent study form. A final project linking planning theory and practical work experience is required. The academic credit, however, is not based on the on-the-job training itself but rather on the active learning and reflection demonstrated in a written paper or project.

class: CRP 7970
class title: Independent Study for Graduate Students
description: For course information contact the department coordinator in 106 West Sibley Hall.

class: CRP 8900
class title: PhD Proseminar
description: Intended for doctoral candidates in city and regional planning and regional science; other students welcome. This course aims to introduce doctoral students to professional skills broadly associated with academic research and teaching. In short, the aim of the course is to prepare future scholars in the field.  Presentation and discussion of current problem areas and research by doctoral students and guest will help students develop a culture of presenting their work along with receiving and providing feedback. 

class: CRP 8901
class title: M.R.P. Exit Project: Research
description: A student preparing an exit project (as defined by the Department of City and Regional Planning) to satisfy the M.R.P. Exit Project Requirement must complete this research course and CRP 8902. A student may not earn any credit connected to the exit project beyond that awarded for completion of CRP 8901 and CRP 8902/8904/8906.

class: CRP 8902
class title: M.R.P. Exit Project: Research Paper-Writing
description: A student preparing a Research Paper (as defined by the Department of City and Regional Planning) to satisfy the M.R.P. Exit Project requirement must complete this course and CRP 8901. A student will use CRP 8902 for writing the Research Paper.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 8901.

class: CRP 8904
class title: M.R.P. Exit Project: Professional Report-Writing
description: A student preparing a Professional Report (as defined by the Department of City and Regional Planning) to satisfy the M.R.P. Exit Project Requirement must complete this course and CRP 8901. A student will use CRP 8904 for writing the Professional Report.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 8901.

class: CRP 8906
class title: M.R.P. Exit Project: Thesis-Writing
description: A student preparing a Thesis (as defined by the Department of City and Regional Planning) to satisfy the M.R.P. Exit Project Requirement must complete this course and CRP 8901. A student will use CRP 8906 for writing the Thesis.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 8901.

class: CRP 8910
class title: Master's Thesis in Regional Science
description: Students, working individually with faculty member(s), prepare a master's thesis in regional science.

class: CRP 8950
class title: Master's Thesis in Historic Preservation Planning
description: Students, working individually with faculty member(s), prepare a master's thesis in historic preservation planning.

class: CRP 9920
class title: Doctoral Dissertation
description: Dissertation research for Ph.D. students in the field of City and Regional Planning after "A" exam has been passed.

class: CS 1110
class title: Introduction to Computing: A Design and Development Perspective
description: Programming and problem solving using Python. Emphasizes principles of software development, style, and testing. Topics include procedures and functions, iteration, recursion, arrays and vectors, strings, an operational model of procedure and function calls, algorithms, exceptions, object-oriented programming. Weekly labs provide guided practice on the computer, with staff present to help. 
outcome: Be fluent in the use of procedural statements -assignments, conditional statements, loops, method calls- and  arrays., Be able to design, code, and test small Python programs that meet requirements expressed in English. This includes a basic understanding of top-down design., Understand the concepts of object-oriented programming as used in Python: classes, subclasses, inheritance, and overriding., Have knowledge of basic searching and sorting algorithms. Have knowledge of the basics of vector computation., 
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: CS 1112
class title: Introduction to Computing: An Engineering and Science Perspective
description: Programming and problem solving using Python. Emphasizes the systematic development of algorithms and programs. Topics include iteration, functions, arrays, strings, recursion, object-oriented programming, algorithms, and data handling and visualization. Assignments are designed to build an appreciation for complexity, dimension, randomness, simulation, and the role of approximation in engineering and science. Weekly discussion section provides guided practice on the computer, with staff present to help.
outcome: Be fluent in the use of procedural statements-assignments, conditional statements, loops, function calls-and arrays. Be able to design, code, and test small Python programs that meet requirements expressed in English. This includes a basic understanding of top-down design., Understand the concepts of object-oriented programming as used in Python: classes, subclasses, inheritance, and overriding., Have knowledge of basic sorting and searching algorithms., Have a working familiarity with libraries such as NumPy and Matplotlib for scientific computation and data visualization., 
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or equivalent.

class: CS 1132
class title: Short Course in MATLAB
description: Introduction to the MATLAB programming language. Covers the basic programming constructs of MATLAB, including assignment, conditionals, iteration, functions, arrays, vectorized computation, and scientific graphics. Designed for students who need MATLAB for research or other courses. Does not assume any previous programming experience.
outcome: Students who take this course will understand the basic MATLAB constructs and be able to write simple programs., 

class: CS 1133
class title: Short Course in Python
description: Introduction to the Python programming language. Covers the basic programming constructs of Python, including assignment, conditionals, iteration, functions, object-oriented design, arrays, and vectorized computation. Designed for students who need Python for research or other courses. Does not assume any previous programming experience.
outcome: Students who take this course will build an understanding the basic Python constructs and be able to write simple programs., 

class: CS 1620
class title: Visual Imaging in the Electronic Age
description: Interdisciplinary survey course designed to introduce students in the creative arts, science, and engineering to the concepts of 2D and 3D digital pictorial representation and display. It is a concept course that concentrates on "why" rather than "how." Topics include perspective representations, display technology, how television works, bandwidth concepts, digital photography, computer graphics modeling and rendering, color perception, 3D data acquisition, volumetric imaging, and historical precedents, primarily from the art world.

class: CS 1710
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: CS 1998
class title: First-year and Nontechnical Team Projects
description: First-year and Nontechnical Team Projects.

class: CS 2024
class title: C++ Programming
description: An intermediate introduction to the C++ programming language and the C/C++ standard libraries. Topics include basic statements, declarations, and types; stream I/O; user-defined classes and types; derived classes, inheritance, and object-oriented programming; exceptions and templates. Recommended for students who plan to take advanced courses in computer science that require familiarity with C++ or C.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one programming course or equivalent programming experience.

class: CS 2110
class title: Object-Oriented Programming and Data Structures
description: Intermediate programming in a high-level language and introduction to software engineering. Topics include object-oriented programming (objects, classes, subtypes, encapsulation, polymorphism), program correctness (specifications, invariants, testing), algorithm analysis (asymptotic complexity, big "O" notation), recursion, data structures (lists, trees, stacks, queues, heaps, hash tables, graphs), iteration and searching/sorting, graph algorithms, and concurrent and event-driven programming (graphical user interfaces, synchronization). Java is the principal programming language.
outcome: Employ recursion and object-oriented programming concepts (e.g., classes, interfaces, polymorphism, inheritance) to solve computational problems., Design, implement, and verify nontrivial Java programs (roughly 1000 lines of code), starting from an English language specification, leveraging features like encapsulation and unit tests to improve maintainability., Build and modify event-driven graphical user interfaces (GUIs) expressed in Java., Analyze the asymptotic complexity of algorithms and programs to evaluate their running times and memory requirements., Implement basic data structures taught in the course (linked lists, binary search trees, heaps, hash tables, adjacency lists) and be able to use them in programs., 
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or CS 1112 or equivalent course on programming in a procedural language.

class: CS 2112
class title: Object-Oriented Design and Data Structures - Honors
description: Intermediate software design and introduction to key computer science ideas. Topics are similar to those in CS 2110 but are covered in greater depth, with more challenging assignments. Topics include object-oriented programming, program structure and organization, program reasoning using specifications and invariants, recursion, design patterns, concurrent programming, graphical user interfaces, data structures as in CS 2110, sorting and graph algorithms, asymptotic complexity, and simple algorithm analysis. Java is the principal programming language.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: excellent performance in CS 1110, CS 1112 or equivalent course in Java or C++, or permission of instructor.

class: CS 2800
class title: Mathematical Foundations of Computing
description: Covers the mathematics that underlies most of computer science. Topics include mathematical induction; logical proof; propositional and
predicate calculus; sets, functions, and relations; graphs; combinatorics and discrete mathematics; basic probability theory; andfinite-state machines. These topics are discussed in the context ofapplications to many areas of computer science.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 1110 or equivilent, one programming course or permission of instructor.

class: CS 2850
class title: Networks
description: This interdisciplinary course examines network structures and how they matter in everyday life. The course examines how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects each of these worlds. Tools of graph theory and game theory are taught and then used to analyze networks. Topics covered include the web, the small world phenomenon, markets, neural networks, contagion, search and the evolution of networks.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: CS 3110
class title: Data Structures and Functional Programming
description: Advanced programming course that emphasizes functional programming techniques and data structures. Programming topics include recursive and higher-order procedures, models of programming language evaluation and compilation, type systems, and polymorphism. Data structures and algorithms covered include graph algorithms, balanced trees, memory heaps, and garbage collection. Also covers techniques for analyzing program performance and correctness.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent programming experience. Prerequisite or corequisite: CS 2800.

class: CS 3300
class title: Visual Data Analytics for the Web
description: This course will cover technologies for representing, modeling and displaying data in the context of interactive web pages. Practical skills for building web pages will be mixed with data mining algorithms and visualization design theory. We will use the D3 Javascript library to develop both static and dynamic visualizations, learn more about programming in Javascript, and explore web scalable vector graphics (SVG). Through design critique and formal study, we will identify the techniques visualization developers employ to create the "right" visualization for a given use case.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110/ENGRD 2110 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 3410
class title: Computer System Organization and Programming
description: Introduction to computer organization, systems programming and the hardware/ software interface. Topics include instruction sets, computer arithmetic, datapath design, data formats, addressing modes, memory hierarchies including caches and virtual memory, I/O devices, bus-based I/O systems, and multicore architectures. Students learn assembly language programming and design a pipelined RISC processor.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent programming experience.

class: CS 3700
class title: Foundations of AI Reasoning and Decision-Making
description: Introduction to major topics in artificial intelligence, including heuristic search, game-playing, knowledge representation and reasoning, planning, probabilistic inference, sequential decision-making and reinforcement learning.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110/ENGRD 2110 and CS 2800, or by permission of instructor.

class: CS 3780
class title: Introduction to Machine Learning
description: The course provides an introduction to machine learning, focusing on supervised learning and its theoretical foundations. Topics include regularized linear models, boosting, kernels, deep networks, generative models, online learning, and ethical questions arising in ML applications.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: probability theory (e.g. BTRY 3080, CS 2800, ECON 3130, ENGRD 2700, MATH 4710) and linear algebra (e.g. MATH 2210, MATH 2310, MATH 2940), single-variable calculus (e.g. MATH 1110, MATH 1920) and programming proficiency (e.g. CS 2110).

class: CS 4090
class title: Teaching Experience in Computer Science
description: Earn course credit for working as a consultant or ugrad TA in a computer science course.

class: CS 4210
class title: Numerical Analysis and Differential Equations
description: Introduction to the fundamentals of numerical analysis: error analysis, approximation, interpolation, numerical integration. In the second half of the course, the above are used to build approximate solvers for ordinary and partial differential equations. Strong emphasis is placed on understanding the advantages, disadvantages, and limits of applicability for all the covered techniques. Computer programming is required to test the theoretical concepts throughout the course.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230-MATH 2240, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940 or equivalent and one additional mathematics course numbered 3000 or above.

class: CS 4320
class title: Introduction to Database Systems
description: Introduction to modern database and data storage systems. Concepts covered include data models, query languages, database designs, storage structures, access methods, query processing and optimization, transaction management, and recovery in both relational and nonrelation data storage systems.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110, CS 2800.

class: CS 4321
class title: Practicum in Database Systems
description: Students build part of a database system in Java.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: CS 4320 or CS 5320.

class: CS 4414
class title: Systems Programming
description: CS 4414 exposes students to programming applications at the systems level and to the operating-systems abstractions that these applications depend on. Students learn to make design choices guided by performance, hardware, security and other systems properties. Operating systems abstractions covered include process and memory management, file systems and storage, networking, threads and multiprocess concurrency along with synchronization abstractions including locks and condition variables, and security abstractions for isolation and authorization. Students gain experience with C/C++ programming, major command-line tools and techniques for debugging, instrumenting and tuning applications.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent.

class: CS 4420
class title: Computer Architecture
description: This course aims to provide a strong foundation for students to understand modern computer system architecture and to apply these insights and principles to future computer designs. The course is structured around the three primary building blocks of general-purpose computing systems: processors, memories, and networks. The first half of the course focuses on the fundamentals of each building block. Topics include processor microcoding and pipelining; cache microarchitecture and optimization; and network topology, routing, and flow control. The second half of the course delves into more advanced techniques and will enable students to understand how these three building blocks can be integrated to build a modern shared-memory multicore system. Topics include superscalar execution, branch prediction, out-of-order execution, register renaming and memory disambiguation; VLIW, vector, and multithreaded processors; memory protection, translation, and virtualization; and memory synchronization, consistency, and coherence. This course includes a significant project decomposed into five lab assignments. Throughout the semester, students will gradually design, implement, test, and evaluate a complete multicore system capable of running real parallel applications at the register-transfer level.
outcome: Describe computer architecture concepts and mechanisms related to the design of modern processors, memories, and networks and explain how these concepts and mechanisms interact., Apply this understanding to new computer architecture design problems within the context of balancing application requirements against technology constraints; more specifically, quantitatively assess a design's execution time in cycles and qualitatively assess a design's cycle time, area, and energy., Evaluate various design alternatives and make a compelling quantitative and/or qualitative argument for why one design is superior to the other approaches., Demonstrate the ability to implement and verify designs of varying complexity at the register-transfer-levels., Create new designs at the register-transfer-level and the associated effective testing strategies., Write concise yet comprehensive technical reports that describe designs implemented at the register-transfer-levels, explain the testing strategy used to verify functionality, and evaluate the designs to determine the superior approach., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3420/ECE 3140 or CS 3410.

class: CS 4450
class title: Introduction to Computer Networks
description: This course introduces the basic architectural and design principles of computer networking including the design of communication protocols, congestion control, routing and switching, Internet, data center networks and wireless networks.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: CS 4620
class title: Introduction to Computer Graphics
description: Introduction to the principles of computer graphics in two and three dimensions.  Topics include digital images, filtering and antialiasing, 2-D and 3-D affine geometry, ray tracing, perspective and 3-D viewing, the graphics pipeline, curves and surfaces, and human visual perception. This course emphasizes fundamental techniques in graphics, with both written and practical assignments.  May be taken with or without concurrent enrollment in CS 4621.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or ENGRD 2110, and MATH 1910 or MATH 1120, and MATH 2940 or MATH 2210 or MATH 2310 or equivalent.

class: CS 4621
class title: Computer Graphics Practicum
description: Provides CS 4620 students with hands-on experience in computer graphics programming on modern graphics hardware. This course emphasizes effective use of graphics APIs and the architecture of graphics applications.  A final project involves building a substantial interactive graphics system.  The course uses Javascript and WebGL for code development.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: CS 4620.

class: CS 4701
class title: Practicum in Artificial Intelligence
description: Artificial Intelligence project class. Topic choice is student driven and (small) teams are encouraged, but each individual team member must do substantial implementation with significant average weekly time commitment. Possible projects topics include knowledge representation systems, search procedures, game-playing, automated reasoning, machine learning, genetic algorithms, planning, natural language processing, computer vision. Should be taken only by students with significant experience in Artificial Intelligence, such as those who have already taken CS 3700, CS 3780, CS 4670, or CS 4740.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses or their equivalents: CS 3700, CS 3780, CS 4670, CS 4740, ECE 4200, ORIE 3741, STSCI 3740. 

class: CS 4745
class title: Computational Linguistics II
description: An in-depth exploration of modern computational linguistic techniques. A continuation of  LING 4424 - Computational Linguistics I. Whereas LING 4424 covers foundational techniques in symbolic computational modeling, this course will cover a wider range of applications as well as coverage of neural network methods. We will survey a range of neural network techniques that are widely used in computational linguistics and natural language processing as well as a number of techniques that can be used to probe the linguistic information and language processing strategies encoded in computational models. We will examine ways of mapping this linguistic information both to linguistic theory as well as to measures of human processing (e.g., neuroimaging data and human behavioral responses).
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 4424 and one other 3000 level or above linguistics course.

class: CS 4750
class title: Foundations of Robotics
description: Robotics is interdisciplinary and draws inspiration from many different fields towards solving a variety of tasks in real-world environments using physical systems. This course is a challenging introduction to basic computational concepts used broadly in robotics. By the end of this course, students should have a fundamental understanding of how the different sub-fields of robotics such as kinematics, state-estimation, motion planning, and controls come together to develop intelligent behaviors in physical robotic systems. The mathematical basis of each area will be emphasized, and concepts will be motivated using common robotics applications. Students will be evaluated using a mixture of theoretical and programming exercises throughout the semester. 
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1112, CS 2110, CS 2800, MATH 1920, MATH 2940 or their equivalents.

class: CS 4756
class title: Robot Learning
description: How do we get robots out of the labs and into the real world with all it's complexities?
Robots must solve two fundamental problems -- (1) Perception: Sense the world using different modalities and (2) Decision making: Act in the world by reasoning over decisions and their consequences. Machine learning promises to solve both problems in a scalable way using data. However, it has fallen short when it comes to robotics.
This course dives deep into robot learning, looks at fundamental algorithms and challenges, and case-studies of real-world applications from self-driving to manipulation.
outcome: Imitation and interactive no-regret learning that handle distribution shifts, exploration/exploitation., Practical reinforcement learning leveraging both model predictive control and model-free methods., Learning perception models using probabilistic inference and 2D/3D deep learning., Frontiers in learning from human feedback (RLHF), planning with LLMs, human motion forecasting and offline reinforcement learning., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800, probability theory (e.g. BTRY 3080, ECON 3130, MATH 4710, ENGRD 2700), linear algebra (e.g. MATH 2940), calculus (e.g. MATH 1920) , programming proficiency (e.g. CS 2110), and CS 3780 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: CS 4775
class title: Computational Genetics and Genomics
description: Computational methods for analyzing genetic and genomic data. Topics include sequence alignment, hidden Markov Models for discovering sequence features, motif finding using Gibbs sampling, phylogenetic tree reconstruction, inferring haplotypes, and local and global ancestry inference. Prior knowledge of biology is not necessary to complete this course.
outcome: Understand computational algorithms used for the analysis of genetic and genomic data, Formulate computational approaches for solving problems in computational genomics, Understand challenges and limitations in inference methods used in computational genetics and genomics, 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3010, CS 2110 or equivalents.

class: CS 4814
class title: Introduction to Computational Complexity
description: Explores the power and limitations of efficient computation. Understanding how the notion of efficient computation changes with respect to resources such as time, space, randomness, advice, and interaction. Concrete computational models that we will study will include Turing machines, Boolean circuits, Decision trees, and Branching Programs. Advanced topics may include error-correcting codes, probabilistic checkable proofs, and circuit lower bounds.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820.

class: CS 4820
class title: Introduction to Analysis of Algorithms
description: Develops techniques used in the design and analysis of algorithms, with an emphasis on problems arising in computing applications. Example applications are drawn from systems and networks, artificial intelligence, computer vision, data mining, and computational biology. This course covers four major algorithm design techniques (greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, and network flow), undecidability and NP-completeness, and algorithmic techniques for intractable problems (including identification of structured special cases , approximation algorithms, local search heuristics, and online algorithms).
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800, CS 3110. 

class: CS 4830
class title: Introduction to Cryptography
description: A rigorous introduction to the theoretical foundations of the cryptography that powers much of the modern world. Topics include one-way functions, secret-key encryption, zero-knowledge proofs, signatures, public-key encryption etc. As this is a theoretical class, the emphasis will be on formal definitions and proofs.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820.

class: CS 4997
class title: Practical Training in Computer Science
description: This independent study course offers CS majors (i.e., undergraduates whose applications to affiliate with the CS major have been approved) an opportunity to reflect on concepts from computer science as they were encountered and applied in a recent internship. Students write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of the computer science major.

class: CS 4998
class title: Team Projects
description: Advanced independent work in computer science as part of a student-led team project. 

class: CS 4999
class title: Independent Reading and Research
description: Independent reading and research for undergraduates.

class: CS 5112
class title: Algorithms and Data Structures for Applications
description: Fundamental algorithms and data structures used in current applications. Algorithms include graph algorithms, hashing and streaming/sketching techniques. Applications will include selected topics in storage and memory systems, machine learning and security.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: sophomore level understanding of basic programming, algorithms, and data structures, or permission of instructor.

class: CS 5220
class title: Applied High-Performance and Parallel Computing
description: Models for parallel programming and survey of parallel machines. Existing parallel programming languages, vectorizing compilers, and parallel libraries and toolboxes.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: course in numerical methods.

class: CS 5320
class title: Introduction to Database Systems
description: Introduction to modern database and data storage systems. Concepts covered include data models, query languages, database design, storage structures, access methods, query processing and optimization, transaction management, and recovery in both relational and nonrelational data storage systems.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or CS 2800.

class: CS 5321
class title: Practicum in Database Systems
description: Students build part of a real database system in C++ Java.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: CS 5320.

class: CS 5414
class title: Distributed Computing Principles
description: Studies the abstractions and algorithms that constitute the foundations for implementing concurrent and distributed computing, with emphasis on supporting fault-tolerance. Topics vary to reflect advances in the field but typically include global state snapshots, causality and clocks (logical and physical), agreement and consensus, primary-backup and state-machine replication, quorums, and gossip. Students undertake a substantial software project to put these ideas into practice. Many students obtain additional project credit by co-registering in CS 4999 or CS 5999.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4410 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 5420
class title: Advanced Computer Architecture
description: This course discusses advanced topics in computer architecture beyond the material that is covered in undergraduate courses such as ECE 4750/CS 4420. In particular, the course places special focus on multicore and multiprocessor architectures (coherence, consistency, synchronization, interconnects, OS support, etc.), as well as advanced architecture techniques (simultaneous multithreading, speculative loads and stores, neural branch predictors, hardware resource management, memory scheduling, etc.) Students work on parallel programming assignments that emphasize hardware-aware performance optimization.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 4750 or CS 4420.

class: CS 5436
class title: Privacy in the Digital Age
description: This course introduces students to privacy technologies and surveys the current state of digital privacy from multiple perspectives, including technology, law, policy, ethics, economics, and surveillance.

class: CS 5456
class title: Introduction to Computer Networks
description: This course introduces the basic architectural and design principles of computer networking including the design of communication protocols, congestion control, routing and switching, Internet, data center networks and wireless networks.

class: CS 5620
class title: Introduction to Computer Graphics
description: Introduction to the principles of computer graphics in two and three dimensions. Topics include digital images, filtering and antialiasing, 2-D and 3-D affine geometry, ray tracing, perspective and 3-D viewing, the graphics pipeline, curves and surfaces, and human visual perception. Homework assignments require some Java programming.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or ENGRD 2110, and MATH 1910 or MATH 1120, and MATH 2940 or MATH 2210 or MATH 2310 or equivalent.

class: CS 5621
class title: Computer Graphics Practicum
description: Provides CS 4620 students with hands-on experience in computer graphics programming on modern graphics hardware. This course emphasizes effective use of graphics APIs and the architecture of graphics applications.  A final project involves building a substantial interactive graphics system.  The course uses Javascript and WebGL for code development.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: CS 5620.

class: CS 5650
class title: Virtual and Augmented Reality
description: This course presents an introduction to virtual and augmented reality technologies, with focus on fundamental principles from 3D math, human perception, graphics, and interaction. Concepts from the contributing fields of computer vision, computer graphics and human computer interaction will be introduced in the context of virtual and augmented reality. Students will be tasked with creating their own virtual or augmented reality application as a course project.

class: CS 5682
class title: HCI and Design
description: Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and design theory and techniques. Methods for designing, prototyping, and evaluating user interfaces. Basics of visual design, graphic design, and interaction design. Understanding human capabilities, interface technology, interface design methods, prototyping tools, and interface evaluation tools and techniques.

class: CS 5700
class title: Foundations of AI Reasoning and Decision-Making
description: Introduction to major topics in artificial intelligence, including heuristic search, game-playing, knowledge representation and reasoning, planning, probabilistic inference, sequential decision-making and reinforcement learning.

class: CS 5727
class title: Optimization Methods
description: This course covers algorithmic and computational tools for solving optimization problems with the goal of providing decision-support for business intelligence. We will cover the fundamentals of linear, integer and nonlinear optimization. We will emphasize optimization as a large-scale computational tool, and show how to link programming languages with optimization software to develop industrial-strength decision-support systems. We will demonstrate how to incorporate uncertainty into optimization problems. Throughout the course, we will cover a variety of modern applications, including pricing and marketing for e-commerce, ad auctions on the web, and on-line ride-sharing.

class: CS 5750
class title: Foundations of Robotics
description: Robotics is interdisciplinary and draws inspiration from many different fields towards solving a variety of tasks in real-world environments using physical systems. This course is a challenging introduction to basic computational concepts used broadly in robotics. By the end of this course, students should have a fundamental understanding of how the different sub-fields of robotics such as kinematics, state-estimation, motion planning, and controls come together to develop intelligent behaviors in physical robotic systems. The mathematical basis of each area will be emphasized, and concepts will be motivated using common robotics applications. Students will be evaluated using a mixture of theoretical and programming exercises throughout the semester. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1112, CS 2110, CS 2800, MATH 1920, MATH 2940 or their equivalents.

class: CS 5756
class title: Robot Learning
description: How do we get robots out of the labs and into the real world with all it's complexities?
Robots must solve two fundamental problems -- (1) Perception: Sense the world using different modalities and (2) Decision making: Act in the world by reasoning over decisions and their consequences. Machine learning promises to solve both problems in a scalable way using data. However, it has fallen short when it comes to robotics.
This course dives deep into robot learning, looks at fundamental algorithms and challenges, and case-studies of real-world applications from self-driving to manipulation.
outcome: Imitation and interactive no-regret learning that handle distribution shifts, exploration/exploitation., Practical reinforcement learning leveraging both model predictive control and model-free methods., Learning perception models using probabilistic inference and 2D/3D deep learning., Frontiers in learning from human feedback (RLHF), planning with LLMs, human motion forecasting and offline reinforcement learning., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800, probability theory (e.g. BTRY 3010, ECON 3130, MATH 4710, ENGRD 2700), linear algebra (e.g. MATH 2940), calculus (e.g. MATH 1920), programming proficiency (e.g. CS 2110), and CS 3780 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: CS 5780
class title: Introduction to Machine Learning
description: The course provides an introduction to machine learning, focusing on supervised learning and its theoretical foundations. Topics include regularized linear models, boosting, kernels, deep networks, generative models, online learning, and ethical questions arising in ML applications.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800, probability theory (e.g. BTRY 3080, ECON 3130, MATH 4710, ENGRD 2700) and linear algebra (e.g. MATH 2940), calculus (e.g. MATH 1920) and programming proficiency (e.g. CS 2110).

class: CS 5781
class title: Machine Learning Engineering
description: Machine learning is increasingly driven by advances in the underlying hardware and software systems. This course will focus on the challenges inherent to engineering machine learning systems to be correct, robust, and fast. The course walks through the development of a software library for machine learning from scratch, with each assignment requiring students to build models in their own library. Topics will include: tensor languages and auto-differentiation; model debugging, testing, and visualization; fundamentals of GPUs; compression and low-power inference. Guest lectures will cover current topics from ML engineers.
 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent programming experience.

class: CS 5785
class title: Applied Machine Learning
description: Learn and apply key concepts of modeling, analysis and validation from machine learning, data mining and signal processing to analyze and extract meaning from data. Implement algorithms and perform experiments on images, text, audio and mobile sensor measurements. Gain working knowledge of supervised and unsupervised techniques including classification, regression, clustering, feature selection, and dimensionality reduction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800 or equivalent, basic familiarity with Matlab or Python, or permission of instructor.

class: CS 5787
class title: Deep Learning
description: Students will learn deep neural network fundamentals, including, but not limited to, feed-forward neural networks, convolutional neural networks, network architectures, optimization methods, practical issues, recurrent neural networks, transformers, generative models, foundation models, current limitations of deep learning, and visualization techniques. We still study applications to problems in computer vision and to a lesser extent other domains such as natural language and audio processing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 5785, ECE 5414, ORIE 5750.

class: CS 5814
class title: Introduction to Computational Complexity
description: Explores the power and limitations of efficient computation. Understanding how the notion of efficient computation changes with respect to resources such as time, space, randomness, advice, and interaction. Concrete computational models that we will study will include Turing machines, Boolean circuits, Decision trees, and Branching Programs. Advanced topics may include error-correcting codes, probabilistic checkable proofs, and circuit lower bounds.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820. 

class: CS 5820
class title: Introduction to Analysis of Algorithms
description: Develops techniques used in the design and analysis of algorithms, with an emphasis on problems arising in computing applications. Example applications are drawn from systems and networks, artificial intelligence, computer vision, data mining, and computational biology. This course covers four major algorithm design techniques (greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, and network flow), undecidability and NP-completeness, and algorithmic techniques for intractable problems (including identification of structured special cases, approximation algorithms, local search heuristics, and online algorithms).

class: CS 5830
class title: Cryptography
description: Introductory course in Cryptography. Topics include one-time pads, stream ciphers, block ciphers, authenticated encryption, asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, and more. The focus is on contemporary cryptographic algorithms used in practice, with some introduction to formal analyses.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800 or equivalent, CS 4810 or mathematical maturity, or permission of instructor.

class: CS 5854
class title: Networks and Markets
description: The course examines how the computing, economic and sociological worlds are connected and how these connections affects these worlds. Tools from computer science, game theory and mathematics are introduced and then used to analyze network structures present in everyday life. Topics covered include social networks, web search, auctions, markets, voting, and crypto-currencies (e.g. bitcoin).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic probability.

class: CS 5998
class title: Master of Engineering Internship
description: Off-campus internship with industry in which a student gains knowledge and experience in the field of computer science.

class: CS 5999
class title: Master of Engineering Project
description: Independent or group project under the direction of a CS field member or researcher. Projects involve the development of a computer science application (software or hardware) useful in exploring and/or solving an engineering problem with a computer science focus.

class: CS 6006
class title: Succeeding in the Graduate Environment
description: This is an onboarding course that first-year PhD students in Computer Science are required to attend during their first semester at Cornell. This course seeks to more formally present some of the "hidden curriculum" that is so often the marker of success in graduate school. Topics will include: your health, wellness, and finances; selecting an advisor and research direction; applying for grants and fellowships; giving a professional talk; setting and managing expectations; choices and consequences in computing.
outcome: Practical understanding of how a Computer Science PhD works in general., Students will be able to navigate their PhD journeys more confidently and know how to ask for help when they need it., 

class: CS 6115
class title: Certified Software Systems
description: In recent years, it has become practical to build large software systems using formal proof assistants. Examples of such certified systems include the seL4 microkernel, the CompCert C compiler, the Vellvm LLVM compiler, and the Bedrock library. This course provides a hands-on introduction to programming using the Coq proof assistant. Assessment is based on participation and a substantial course project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 6110 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 6158
class title: Software Engineering in the Era of Machine Learning
description: Recent advances in Machine Learning have led to remarkable results in natural language processing, video generation, code generation, etc. On one hand, Machine Learning enables solving challenging software engineering problems through data-driven techniques. On the other hand, Machine Learning systems present novel software engineering challenges that traditional methods cannot handle. This course will explore research in this important intersection of software engineering and machine learning.  Topics that will be covered include 1) foundational software engineering concepts, such as testing, debugging, and program analysis, 2) software engineering techniques for improving the quality of machine learning systems, and 3) the use of machine-learning techniques (including Large Language Models) to improve software engineering.
outcome: Understand and apply static and dynamic program analyses such as automated test generation, debugging, and dataflow analysis., Apply machine learning-based techniques to solve software engineering problems., Apply automated software engineering techniques to machine learning systems., Understand and analyze recent research results in software engineering., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following courses or their equivalents: CS 3110, CS 4120, CS 5154 and at least one of the following courses or their equivalents: CS 3780, CS 4740, CS 4782. 

class: CS 6172
class title: Program Synthesis
description: An introduction to program synthesis: the problem of automatically generating programs from specifications of their desired behavior. Program synthesis draws on the fields of programming languages and artificial intelligence with the aim of helping to improve software engineering by automatically generating code; help expand the usability of computers by allowing non-coders to harness the power of programming languages; and help us build more interpretable, symbolic AI systems that can write new code. Covers classic areas such as programming-by-example, constraint-based synthesis using SMT solvers, type-directed program synthesis, and inductive logic programming. Covers recent developments in mixed discrete/continuous and neural/symbolic program synthesis. Covers deep learning methods for building efficient, scalable program synthesizers.
outcome: Identify where and how program synthesis can be used to solve engineering problems., Be able to build program synthesizers which combine techniques from programming languages and AI., Understand open problems in the field and be equipped to work on them., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3110, CS 3700, and CS 3780/CS 5780 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 6210
class title: Matrix Computations
description: Stable and efficient algorithms for linear equations, least squares, and eigenvalue problems. Direct and iterative methods are considered. Numerical programming is used extensively.

class: CS 6410
class title: Advanced Systems
description: Advanced course in systems, emphasizing contemporary research in distributed systems. Topics may include communication protocols, consistency in distributed systems, faulttolerance, knowledge and knowledge-based protocols, performance, scheduling, concurrency control, and authentication and security issues.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4410 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 6431
class title: Security and Privacy Technologies
description: A survey of modern security and privacy technologies. Topics include exploitation techniques, web and mobile security, uses and misuses of cryptography in secure systems, attacking and defending secure network protocols, data privacy and anonymity, censorship resistance, electronic payments. This course includes a major project component in the form of major programming assignments and/or other activities.

class: CS 6662
class title: Computational Imaging
description: Computational imaging is the holistic design of imaging systems together with algorithms, blending ideas from computer vision, optics, imaging, and machine learning to overcome the limits of traditional cameras and imaging systems (e.g. capturing the first image of the black hole and imaging light-fields). This course will provide an overview of the state of the art in computational imaging. We will learn how to mathematically model different aspects of imaging systems, such as noise, aberrations, and light propagation. In addition, we will learn how to formulate and solve imaging inverse problems using both classical and modern deep-learning-based approaches. Throughout the course, we will discuss exciting active research topics such as lensless imaging, compressive imaging, phase microscopy, time-of-flight imaging, and tomography. The class will culminate in an open-ended final project.
outcome: Mathematically model different aspects of imaging systems, including noise, aberrations, and wavelength dependence., Formulate and solve imaging inverse problems for several imaging systems (e.g. deconvolution, denoising, tomography, phase imaging) using several different methods., Differentiate and distinguish different inverse problem algorithms, from classic to deep methods., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of linear algebra and working knowledge of Python.

class: CS 6672
class title: 3D Vision
description: The ability to infer, model, and utilize 3D information from perceptual input is crucial to various intelligent systems (e.g., self-driving vehicles, mobile robots) and AI tasks (e.g., 2D image/3D asset generation, robot manipulation). The course will investigate the fundamentals and the latest advances in 3D vision as well as their applications in different fields. The topics include image formation, multi-view geometry, (neural) 3D representations, learning-based 3D algorithms, neural rendering, generative models, etc. The course will feature a mixture of lectures, paper presentations (both classic and modern), and a group final project. The students will play around various algorithms and models and improve or propose a creative use of them.
outcome: Describe the challenges and limitations in 3D., Analyze the pros and cons of 3D techniques and properly benchmark them., Design new solutions to address identified limitations., Identify potential applications of different 3D algorithms and applying them to different domains to resolve respective challenges., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110, CS 2800, CS 4670, MATH 1920​, MATH 2940 or their equivalents. 

class: CS 6740
class title: Advanced Language Technologies
description: Graduate-level introduction to technologies for the computational treatment of information in human-language form, covering modern natural-language processing (NLP) and/or information retrieval (IR). Possible topics include language modeling, word embeddings, text categorization and clustering, information extraction, computational syntactic and semantic formalisms, grammar induction, machine translation, latent semantic analysis (LSI), and clickthrough data for web search.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent, a course in artificial intelligence or any relevant subfield (e.g., NLP, information retrieval, machine learning, Cornell CS courses numbered 47xx or 67xx), proficiency with using machine learning tools (e.g., fluency at training an SVM, comfort with assessing a classifier's performance using cross-validation).

class: CS 6741
class title: Topics in Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning
description: Robust language understanding has the potential to transform how we interact with computers, extract information from text and study language on large scale. This research-oriented course examines machine learning and inference methods for recovering language structure and meaning. Possible topics include structured prediction and deep learning, methods for situated language understanding, language grounding, and learning to generate text.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent programming experience, CS 3780/CS 5780 or CS 6780 or equivalent.

class: CS 6742
class title: Natural Language Processing and Social Interaction
description: More and more of life is now manifested online, and many of the digital traces that are left by human activity are increasingly recorded in natural-language format. This research-oriented course examines the opportunities for natural language processing to contribute to the analysis and facilitation of socially embedded processes. Possible topics include sentiment analysis, learning social-network structure, analysis of text in political or legal domains, review aggregation systems, analysis of online conversations, and text categorization with respect to psychological categories.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3110 or equivalent programming experience, a course in artificial intelligence or any relevant subfield (e.g., NLP, information retrieval, machine learning).

class: CS 6752
class title: Formal Methods for Robotics
description: How can we guarantee robots will never cause harm? How can we prove that complicated mechanical systems, controlled by computers and programmed by people, will always behave as expected under changing conditions and in a variety of uncertain environments? How do we formalize what such behaviors are? Guaranteeing safety, predictability and reliability of robots is crucial for the assimilation of such systems into society, be it at home or in the workplace. While every robotics researcher working with or on a robot is aware of safety issues, only recently the robotics community has begun looking at ways to either formally prove or grarantee by design different behavioral properties such as safety and correctness. This class will present recent results on the topic of formal methods for robotics and automation that combine and extend ideas from control theory, dynamical systems, automata theory, logic, model checking, synthesis, and hybrid systems.
outcome: The student will be able to define specifications using different formalisms such as temporal logics and sets., The student will be able to will explain different verification algorithms., The student will be able to explain the different approaches to control synthesis., The student will be able to present a state-of-the-art research paper in a way that conveys the main contribution of the paper., The student will be able to apply the tools learned in the class to their individually chosen project., 

class: CS 6758
class title: Deep Learning for Robotics
description: Deep learning has become a pivotal force in recent robotics research advancements, from estimating the state of the world to solving complex long-horizon tasks. The new paradigm shifts from traditional feature and model engineering to learning task-relevant representations from raw data. This is fueled by increasingly more affordable hardware and diverse data sources from which algorithms may learn from. This graduate-level course examines how deep learning approaches have been applied to robotics problems, including various topics of robot perception and control. We will also discuss the recent trend of large-scale representation learning and foundation models for robotics.
outcome: Evaluate recent works on deep robot learning., Demonstrate how deep learning methods can be utilized for perception and control., Compare data-driven approaches and tradition approaches and describe their strengths and weaknesses., Implement, evaluate, and analyze cutting-edge deep robot learning methods., Apply deep learning techniques to solve real-world robot applications., 

class: CS 6783
class title: Machine Learning Theory
description: This course on machine learning theory introduces basic results, tools, and techniques used in analysis of statistical and online learning algorithms. The course also introduces the basics of computational learning theory.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3780/CS 5780 or CS 4786/CS 5786 or CS 6780 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: CS 6784
class title: Advanced Topics in Machine Learning
description: Extends and complements CS 3780 (formally CS 4780) and CS 5780, giving in-depth coverage of new and advanced methods in machine learning.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3780 or CS 5780 or equivalents or permission of instructor.

class: CS 6789
class title: Foundations of Reinforcement Learning
description: State-of-art intelligent systems often need the ability to make sequential decisions in an unknown, uncertain, possibly hostile environment, by actively interacting with the environment to collect relevant data. Reinforcement Learning is a general framework that can capture the interactive learning setting. This graduate level course focuses on theoretical and algorithmic foundations of Reinforcement Learning. The topics of the course will include: basics of Markov Decision Process (MDP); Sample efficient learning in discrete MDPs; Sample efficient learning in large-scale MDPs; Off-policy policy optimization; Policy gradient methods; Imitation learning &amp; Learning from demonstrations; Contextual Bandits. Throughout the course, we will go over algorithms, prove performance guarantees, and also discuss relevant applications. This is an advanced and theory-heavy course: there is no programming assignment and students are required to work on a theory-focused course project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3780/CS 5780 or equivalent, BTRY 3080 or ECON 3130 or MATH 4710 and ORIE 3300 and MATH 2940.

class: CS 6814
class title: Probabilistic Proofs
description: This course offers a graduate-level introduction to the theory of probabilistic proof systems. The area has deep connections to many aspects of theoretical computer science, including complexity theory and hardness of approximation, coding theory, cryptography and quantum computing. Topics covered will include the PCP theorem, interactive proofs, zero knowledge, succinct arguments, and quantum proof systems.
outcome: Describe the types of probabilistic proof system and their application in different areas of theoretical computer science., Rigorously prove core properties of proof systems., Design proof systems suitable for specific problems., 

class: CS 6820
class title: Analysis of Algorithms
description: Methodology for developing and analyzing efficient algorithms. Understanding the inherent complexity of natural problems via polynomial-time algorithms, advanced data structures, randomized algorithms, approximation algorithms, and NP-completeness. Additional topics may include algebraic and number theoretic algorithms, circuit lower bounds, online algorithms, or algorithmic game theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820 or graduate level students.

class: CS 6828
class title: Modern Prediction Paradigms: Responsible Machine Learning
description: Predictive algorithms influence and shape society. The use of machine learning to make predictions about people raises a host of basic questions: What does it mean for a predictive algorithm to be fair to individuals from marginalized groups? On what basis should we deem a predictive algorithm to be valid? And when should we trust (or distrust) a predictor's output? This course surveys recent developments in the theory of responsible machine learning. We overview new paradigms for formulating learning problems and highlight key algorithmic tools in the study of fairness, validity, and robustness. Topics covered include: Multicalibration and Outcome Indistinguishability, Omniprediction, Performative Prediction, Distributional Robustness, and Verification of Learning.
outcome: Identify common patterns and assumptions underlying modern prediction problems., Evaluate, given new settings, whether using machine prediction is appropriate., When appropriate, apply principled frameworks for reasoning about prediction (e.g., outcome indistinguishability, performative prediction) to reason about machine learning responsibly., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 3780 or equivalent, and CS 4820.

class: CS 6830
class title: Cryptography
description: A rigorous introduction to the theoretical foundations of the cryptography that powers much of the modern world. As this is a theoretical class, the emphasis will be on formal definitions and proofs. E.g., what does it mean to communicate securely? Can I prove that I am who I claim to be without revealing additional information (such as information that allows others to impersonate me)?
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: general ease with algorithms and elementary probability theory, maturity with mathematical proofs (ability to read and write mathematical proofs).

class: CS 6840
class title: Algorithmic Game Theory
description: Algorithmic Game Theory combines algorithmic thinking with game-theoretic, or more generally, economic concepts. Designing and analyzing large-scale multi-user systems and as well as such markets, requires good understanding of tools from algorithms, game theory, and graph theory. The course will develop mathematically sophisticated techniques at the interface between algorithms and game theory, and will consider their applications to markets, auctions, networks, as well as the Internet.

class: CS 6850
class title: The Structure of Information Networks
description: For description, see INFO 6850.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820.

class: CS 7090
class title: Computer Science Colloquium
description: Weekly meeting for the discussion and study of important topics in the field.

class: CS 7190
class title: Seminar in Programming Languages
description: The Programming Languages Discussion Group meets weekly to discuss papers in the area of programming languages, program analysis, and compilers. The goal is to encourage interactions and discussions between students, researchers, and faculty with interests in this area. The seminar is open to everybody interested in languages and compilers. First-year and second-year students are especially encouraged to participate.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 6110 or permission of instructor.

class: CS 7290
class title: Seminar on Scientific Computing and Numerics
description: Talks on various methods in scientific computing, the analysis of their convergence properties and computational efficiency, and their adaptation to specific applications.

class: CS 7390
class title: Database Seminar
description: The database seminar is the weekly meeting of students and faculty interested in data management and data mining at Cornell. We typically discuss one or two papers on related topics per session. We focus on recent and seminal papers of general interest.

class: CS 7490
class title: Systems Research Seminar
description: The Systems Research Seminar discusses recent, interesting papers in the systems area, broadly defined to span operating systems, distributed systems, networking, architecture, databases, security, and programming languages. The goal is to foster technical discussions among the Cornell systems research community.

class: CS 7670
class title: Special Topics in Computer Vision
description: Informal weekly seminar in which current topics in computer vision are discussed.

class: CS 7690
class title: Computer Graphics and Vision Seminar
description: The Graphics/Vision Research Seminar discusses recent research in the areas of computer graphics and computer vision. The goal is to foster technical discussions and collaboration among the Cornell graphics and vision research community.

class: CS 7790
class title: Seminar in Artificial Intelligence
description: The AI seminar will meet weekly for lectures by graduate students, faculty, and researchers emphasizing work-in-progress and recent results in AI research.

class: CS 7794
class title: Seminar in Natural Language Understanding
description: This course, the NLP seminar, is a weekly meeting for people currently or soon to be actively doing research in NLP. (Students simply looking to learn more about NLP should not enroll, but should take one of our lecture courses instead.) One participant leads discussion each week, either of a recently published paper or of their own work in progress.

class: CS 7796
class title: Robotics Seminar
description: Informal seminar in which current topics in robotics are discussed.

class: CS 7890
class title: Seminar in Theory of Algorithms and Computing
description: The theory seminar will meet weekly for lectures by graduate students, faculty, and researchers emphasizing work-in-progress and recent results related to theory of computing.

class: CS 7999
class title: Independent Research
description: Independent research for CS PhD students who have not yet passed their A-exam.

class: CZECH 1131
class title: Elementary Czech I
description: This course aims to expand basic proficiency in understanding, reading, speaking, and writing the Czech language.  The course works through a selection of dialogues, texts and exercises to develop mastery of the most essential idiomatic vocabulary and grammatical structures necessary for basic communications in Czech and for laying a solid foundation for further study of the language.

class: CZECH 1133
class title: Intermediate Czech I
description: The purpose of this course is for students to acquire intermediate proficiency in reading, writing, speaking and understanding the Czech language while expanding their knowledge of Czech geography, history, culture and contemporary realia.  Students will further their mastery of Czech grammatical structures and develop vocabulary sufficient to discuss areas of personal interest with ease and to accomplish a wide range of communicative tasks.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CZECH 1131 or permission of instructor.

class: DEA 1101
class title: Visual Literacy and Design Studio
description: This course is an introductory design studio.  The primary course objective is to introduce principles of visual literacy as it pertains to two-dimensional and three-dimensional issues in design at all scales.  Concepts about representation, expression, composition, color, form, light, structure, and function will be explored through project based learning.  The emphasis will be on learning explicit compositional concepts, visualization skills, and media techniques as well as implicit design sensitivities to serve the student throughout the rest of his or her DEA experience and beyond.
outcome: Develop grounding in the field through the learning 2D and 3D design principles both in theory and in practice (comprehend discipline and field)., Investigate a number of disciplinary perspectives including painting, typography, mathematics, engineering, architecture, product design, and interiors in the studio projects (apply multi-disciplinary perspectives)., Apply explicit concepts to creative original works to learn the connections between knowledge, research, and design (think critically)., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)

class: DEA 1110
class title: Making a Difference by Design
description: This course provides a broad overview of design applied various disciplines, scales, and problem contexts, and how design can offer an alternative, and often more human-centered perspective towards solving the problems around us. With a focus on designing with a human-centered mindset in this age of technology, we will examine topics on the role of design in wearable computing, virtual and tangible interfaces, robotics to biology. We will also apply the lens of design to issues on sustainability, healthy environments, diversity and inclusion, and designing for social good. Each week, through case studies and familiar examples, DEA 1110 explores how designing is part of every discipline.
outcome: Comprehend disciplines and fields, develop an understanding of design applied across a wide range of disciplines to make a difference, and learn to appreciate design at different scales and applied across problem contexts., Apply multi-disciplinary perspectives, identify and examine the relationship between design, technology, and other disciplines, and proactively apply interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary perspectives to problem-solving., Write, speak, and use visual communications effectively, demonstrate the ability to develop and communicate one's creative ideas effectively through writing, visuals, and tangible prototypes., 

class: DEA 1140
class title: Principles of Design Computing
description: The course will cover foundational skills and best practices for design communication in terms of the underlying principles of computing technologies. This course will help students become versatile in utilizing various approaches and tools for tasks in Design and Environmental Analysis (DEA) and Fiber Science &amp; Apparel Design (FSAD) programs. The first module will cover the foundations of 2D graphics and technical drawing. The second module will be an introduction to 3D modeling and rendering. Each module will start as one class with a focus on general principles and will be followed by the class dividing into two sections for applications specific to DEA and FSAD programs. The final module will include an introduction to Generative Artificial Intelligence techniques as a part of a collaborative final project where students will work in multidisciplinary teams to design, curate, and propose an exhibition (DEA) for a fashion collection (FSAD). Through lectures, class activities, homework and projects, the course will help students build confidence in digital design skills and be encouraged to explore further on their own.
outcome: Foundational skills in 2D and 3D digital media for design communication., Critical thinking in design communication., Put principles and elements of design into practice., 

class: DEA 1500
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology
description: Environmental Psychology is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams.
outcome: Provide overview of knowledge about the environment and human behavior (grounding in field)., Understand cultural and life course diversity in human-environment interactions (sensitivity to diversity)., Learn how to analyze problems like an environmental psychologist (develop critical thinking skill)., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, LAD-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: DEA 1501
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology - Writing in the Major
description: Human-Environment Relations is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams. Lecture and discussion sections. WIM section attends a regular lecture but also meets weekly with a graduate writing instructor. The two principal objectives of WIM section:
distribution categories: (D-HE, LAD-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: DEA 2020
class title: Introduction to Sustainable Design
description: This course introduces the histories, concepts, and frameworks that underlie our understanding of sustainability and how they are shaping environmentally conscious design practices - explored through an investigation of materials, processes, products, practices, and material culture. We utilizes exploratory, participatory, and open-ended learning methods to facilitate design inquiry and propose a more environmentally and socially just future.
outcome: To understand the historical contexts in which the post-industrial concept of sustainability emerged, and its contemporary use as a cross-disciplinary term., To understand the underlying physical and social science components that define sustainability on a global scale., To explore both the practical and theoretical discourses and actions that shape sustainable design practices., To investigate systems of contemporary material culture production using design research and analysis methods., To explore, develop, and deploy graphic techniques of information visualization and narrative communication to generate accessible and informative presentations., To work effectively with others across multiple disciplines and contribute to critical class discourse and collaborative research., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)

class: DEA 2201
class title: Magnifying Small Spaces Studio
description: We often observe, define and interact with the human body as a collection of discreet and varied selves: biological, kinesthetic, phenomenological, physiological. This studio focuses on the constellation of ontologies that form our understanding of what it means to be human, and the corresponding impact these have on how we design and who we design for. At the core of our work will be the question of whether engaging the body as a manifold of ontologies allow designers to better understand and construct the built environment.
outcome: Collect, analyze and incorporate human-centered information into design propositions using rigorous and iterative design methodologies., Utilize physical and digital design methods to generate, fabricate and evaluate design propositions., Develop an understanding of how to communicate your design propositions and processes in a clear and concise manner that is both accessible and innovative, using graphics, prototypes and text., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DEA 1101 and DEA 1150 with minimum grades of B-, or permission of instructor.

class: DEA 2510
class title: History of Design Futures
description: This course examines the history and theory of environmental design from the classical era to the 20th century with an emphasis on design and innovation as a catalyst for cultural change. How have design innovations broadened the palate of human expression and experience? Key projects, methods, and ideas from across the world will be explored encouraging a speculative approach to historical material.
outcome: Develop a foundational understanding of movements and periods in architecture, interior design, art, product design, furniture and landscape and object/space design, and relate them to their cultural, technological, social, and spatial contexts., Explore the use of research, writing, visual analysis, and multimedia in formulating and presenting a thesis or position., Cultivate a speculative approach to historical material. Identify potential linkages between past and current design practice., Explore how historical precedents can serve as points of inspiration or resistance in contemporary design practice., Consider the impact of shifting modes of technology and systems of communication on cultural, social, physical, and intellectual experiences of spaces and objects, and trace their trajectories., 
distribution categories: (HA-HE) (HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DEA 1101, DEA 1150/DEA 1140, and DEA 1500​.

class: DEA 2730
class title: Human Centered Design Methods
description: This course explores the use of design methods to generate ideas and evaluate designed objects, environments, and interfaces. Lectures cultivate an understanding of the various methods, while hands-on activities provide opportunity to apply these methods to the design of a small device and its interactions with people and things.
outcome: To develop an understanding of how and which design methodologies can be applied in the iterative design process., To demonstrate the ability to develop and evaluate design prototypes responsive to the challenges and opportunities of supporting and augmenting human users., To communicate a design process in a research poster and video that satisfy requirements of benchmark, design-research conferences., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DEA 1101, DEA 1150/DEA 1140, and DEA 1500.

class: DEA 3301
class title: Design UX with Technology Studio
description: This intermediate-level studio focuses on designing innovative commercial and/or learning/workplace environments. Various types of users experience design and evaluation approaches to design-problem solving will engage students in innovative interior design processes and outcomes. Effective use of technology for user experience simulation will be emphasized throughout the course.
outcome: Gather, evaluate, and apply information and research findings to innovatively solve design problems., Demonstrate creative and critical thinking and originality through presentation in variety of ideas, approaches, and concepts., Develop a good understanding of team work dynamics: collaboration, consensus building, and leadership; and work effectively with others., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DEA 1101 and DEA 1150 with minimum grades of B-, or permission of instructor.

class: DEA 3500
class title: The Ambient Environment
description: Introduces human-factor considerations in lighting, acoustics, noise control, indoor air quality and ventilation, and the thermal environment. Views the ambient environment as a support system that should promote human efficiency, productivity, health, and safety. Emphasizes the implications for planning, design, and management of settings and facilities.
outcome: Explore key concepts in each of the major topic areas covered i.e. indoor climate (thermal conditions, ventilation and air quality), indoor lighting, and indoor acoustics., Understand environmental measurement techniques and be familiar with methods., Understand how recent transformations in technology have influenced the design of the ambient environment, including the Ambient Intelligence (AmI) paradigm and its opportunities for designing intelligent environments., 

class: DEA 3510
class title: Human Factors and Inclusive Design
description: The course explores how human factors and user inclusivity can be systematically considered and implemented in the development of products (e.g., the capabilities and constraints of the physical, cognitive and cultural makeup of human beings). The course includes practical exercises and field project work.
outcome: An ability to articulate key concepts of human factors and inclusive design including human information processing, cognitive and physical human-product relationships, and design exclusivity assessment., Evidence-based reasoning and make critical judgments about both inclusivity and human factors issues., Theoretical knowledge and practical skills to initiate, design, and report an empirically-based project that addresses issues of human factors and inclusive design., Critical skills to improve the ergonomic aspects of a product and knowledge of aging- and disability-related design challenges., 

class: DEA 3530
class title: Planning and Managing the Workplace: Evidence-Based Design and Organizational Ecology
description: Examine how the physical design and management of workplaces impacts both the health and performance of knowledge workers and also an organization's overall business outcomes. Learn about the latest trends in various workplace settings. Analyze the components of work and provide relevant and applicable design solutions. Learn the fundamentals of ethnographic methods for collecting user information to inform decision making about planning and managing workplaces to maximize health, efficiency, safety, productivity, and profitability. 
outcome: Communicate orally and through written reports with FPM representatives and clients and strengthen professional and ethical skills., Interpret and apply evidence to improve performance, quality, and efficiency for knowledge workers and organizations., Direct one's own learning to seek the critical knowledge needed to solve problems using ethnographic methods., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)

class: DEA 4000
class title: Directed Readings
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent reading.

class: DEA 4010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves data collection and analysis or laboratory or studio projects.

class: DEA 4020
class title: Supervised Fieldwork
description: For study that involves both responsible participation in a community setting and reflection on that experience through discussion, reading, and writing. Academic credit is awarded for this integration of theory and practice.

class: DEA 4025
class title: Design for Change: Imagining Decolonial Futures
description: This course explores the role of design in reshaping the world towards social justice and sustainability. Designing for change requires creating different cultural patterns and worldviews — examining taken-for-granted assumptions, narratives, and myths of the hegemonic cultural model (known as Modernity) that limit our capacity to imagine the world differently. As the world is enmeshed in colossal interconnected crises, it seems that imagination has been funneled to two avenues: techno-solutions to the symptoms of the crises and dystopic futures. This course explores two main ideas: a) alternatives are possible, b) the area of design for change would benefit from exchanges with different cultures and knowledge systems. Designing decolonial futures is about weaving together knowledge from multiple cultures, thus recognizing and creating alternatives based on different ways of understanding the world.
outcome: Students will be able to understand what is at stake in the international movement to "decolonize design" and the importance of detaching design from the assumptions, promises, and values of Modernity/Coloniality to generate significant change. Students will be introduced to the main theories and approaches used in decolonial design: decoloniality, pluriversality, epistemologies of the South, transition discourses/design, speculative design, and design for social innovation., Students will be able to recognize structural features of the Eurocentric Modernity at the root of social inequities and unsustainability (which connect social and environmental crises). Without examining these structures, designers keep trying to solve the symptoms instead of addressing the causes. Particularly, students will reflect upon the legacy of colonialism on society and the natural environment., Students will be able to recognize that narratives frame the way we design. Creating different futures requires new narratives and visions to reframe the design practice and the meaning of technological innovations. Students will be asked to create new narratives to reframe their design practice/research., Students will be able to recognize taken-for-granted assumptions and myths of Modernity that hinder the understanding of other cultures, epistemologies, and ontologies—i.e., even when designers want to listen to the Other, the understanding is very limited. Therefore this course aims to enhance the student's capacity to listen to and collaborate with people from other cultures— recognizing and respecting differences in worldviews, cultural patterns, ways of knowing—to generate change., Students will be asked to create compelling visual communications, knowledge visualizations, and narratives to communicate the topics discussed in class and their visions of alternative futures to other people. The creative outputs will be assembled into an exhibit that will take place in one of CHE galleries and on a website., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, HA-HE, LAD-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG)

class: DEA 4030
class title: Teaching Apprenticeship
description: For study that includes teaching methods in the field and assisting faculty with instruction. Students must have demonstrated a high level of performance in the subject to be taught and in the overall academic program.

class: DEA 4050
class title: Design Portfolio and Communication
description: This course is designed for students who want to learn the basic principles of visual communication and how to apply them in concert with design methodologies in order to solve communication and design problems. Visual communication can clarify, distill and translate complex designs, data and ideas. The class introduces principles of graphic design and visual communications using a range of representation techniques. It explores ways to communicate ideas digitally through text, image and video. The focus will be on the applications in Adobe Creative Cloud, including Illustrator, InDesign, Photoshop and AfterEffects.
outcome: Read, understand and communicate in the language of graphic design., Use design technology such as Photoshop, Illustrator, and InDesign., To develop systems of creative thinking that will aid in solving visual problems., Create a portfolio with excellent craftsmanship and clear communication., Ability to identify/create opportunity for professional practice., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)

class: DEA 4220
class title: Ecological Literacy and Design
description: This course is a design-oriented lecture/seminar course for students who are concerned about the role they play as design professionals in affecting the biophysical world. The course's prime objective is to develop a new worldview founded on a broader sensitivity for things living and an accompanying set of meaningful environmental ethics. The course's secondary objectives are to develop a deeper knowledge of environmental issues, construct conceptual frameworks for analysis of these issues and to demonstrate how ecological knowledge can be applied to design. 
outcome: Develop grounding in the field of ecology as it pertains to the human/nature relationship and the manifest expressions of these ideas through the design of the built environment., Demonstrate a greater proficiency in critical thinking through rhetorical analysis and criticism of the readings., Display commitment to ethical principles, especially those pertaining to the environment., 

class: DEA 4401
class title: Adaptive Reuse Studio: Recycling the Built Environment
description: Economic and social forces have created the need for the adaptive reuse of existing structures vs new construction throughout the built environment.  Utilizing sustainable principles and the LEED rating system, this comprehensive studio challenges students to complete all phases of a historic preservation project using an historic structure in the Northeast.  Site visits for building assessments, professional practice tutorials, and seminars on preservation enable students to develop a holistic understanding of how a building thinks and learns over time.
outcome: Research, document and re-design an existing historic structure for rehabilitation by completing all phases of an adaptive reuse project (innovate in research, design or practice, write, speak, and use visual communications effectively)., Integrate professional practice procedures to facilitate the transition from educational to professional expectations (display commitment to ethical principles, apply multi-disciplinary perspectives)., Initiate preparation for the NCIDQ licensing examination (think critically)., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must have completed two DEA studio courses, one at 2000 level and one at 3000 level, and DEA 3050 or receive permission of instructor.

class: DEA 4500
class title: Policy Meets Design: High-Impact Facilities of the 21st Century
description: Active participation from local and global leads, industry, and healthcare providers, students examine how well-designed environments and policies empower people, organizations, and communities to achieve their health-related operational and business objectives.  Students apply the lessons from high-impact environments to their specific area of interest (e.g. senior living, healthcare, hospitality, education, housing, landscape, and urban planning).
outcome: Assess environments strategies and policies, identify operational and environmental gaps, and propose design solution., Explore how concepts of environmental psychology, behavioral economics, sustainability, and LEAN can be used to optimize facility and environmental design., Take part in conversations with community, national and global leaders and participate in debates to evaluate various impacts of decisions on people., 

class: DEA 4590
class title: Problem-Seeking through Programming
description: An architectural program is used to define the design problem, guide the design process and evaluate design solutions.  Students will develop skills in preparing a program while keeping in mind the potential audiences.  This course emphasizes the role of social science research and environment - behavior interaction in facility planning and in the design process.
outcome: Students will be able to identify different design programming methods and understanding key issues to consider in selecting and implementing a particular programming approach through lectures, readings, and hands-on exercise (grounding in disciplines and fields)., Students will utilize social science research, facility management skills, and design concepts to develop a program of space requirements (multidisciplinary perspectives)., Students will be able to develop critical success factors in developing and managing an effective programming process by participating in a major programming project for a real client (critical thinking)., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE, SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: DEA 4990
class title: Senior Honors Thesis
description: Opportunity for DEA majors to undertake original research and scholarly work leading to the preparation of a thesis. Students work closely with their thesis advisor on a topic of interest. For information, students should visit https://www.human.cornell.edu/dea/academics/undergraduate/honors.

class: DEA 5304
class title: Design Accountability: Evaluation of the Physical Environment
description: Designers must be accountable for the impact of the environment on the people who experience it. Well-constructed evaluations are a means to objectively assess whether we have achieved the intended design goals. This course illustrates the theoretical roots of evaluation and provides guidance on conducting building and landscape evaluation research. 
outcome: This course will teach students how to evaluate design work. The subjects of these evaluations can range from objects to buildings to urban design. Upon completing the course, students will be able to:, Describe current, comprehensive definitions and interpretation of evaluation research., Place the historical and theoretical roots of evaluation in the context of the needs of contemporary society., Establish techniques for establishing the business case and integrating research into practice., Assess the effectiveness of the multiple methods of gathering evaluation data., Conduct evaluation research projects involving all scales of the physical environment including furniture, architecture, landscape architecture and urban design., Reflect on the impact of service-learning., Critique and evaluate information, design, and claims; interpret visual information; demonstrate quantitative reasoning and statistical analysis., 

class: DEA 6000
class title: Special Problems for Graduates
description: For study of special problems in the areas of interior design, human environment relations, or facilities planning and management.

class: DEA 6010
class title: Directed Readings
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent study.

class: DEA 6020
class title: Graduate Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves collection and analysis of research data.

class: DEA 6025
class title: Design for Change: Imagining Decolonial Futures
description: This course explores the role of design in reshaping the world towards social justice and sustainability. Designing for change requires creating different cultural patterns and worldviews — examining taken-for-granted assumptions, narratives, and myths of the hegemonic cultural model (known as Modernity) that limit our capacity to imagine the world differently. As the world is enmeshed in colossal interconnected crises, it seems that imagination has been funneled to two avenues: techno-solutions to the symptoms of the crises and dystopic futures. This course explores two main ideas: a) alternatives are possible, b) the area of design for change would benefit from exchanges with different cultures and knowledge systems. Designing decolonial futures is about weaving together knowledge from multiple cultures, thus recognizing and creating alternatives based on different ways of understanding the world.
outcome: Students will be able to understand what is at stake in the international movement to "decolonize design" and the importance of detaching design from the assumptions, promises, and values of Modernity/Coloniality to generate significant change. Students will be introduced to the main theories and approaches used in decolonial design: decoloniality, pluriversality, epistemologies of the South, transition discourses/design, speculative design, and design for social innovation., Students will be able to recognize structural features of the Eurocentric Modernity at the root of social inequities and unsustainability (which connect social and environmental crises). Without examining these structures, designers keep trying to solve the symptoms instead of addressing the causes. Particularly, students will reflect upon the legacy of colonialism on society and the natural environment., Students will be able to recognize that narratives frame the way we design. Creating different futures requires new narratives and visions to reframe the design practice and the meaning of technological innovations. Students will be asked to create new narratives to reframe their design practice/research., Students will be able to recognize taken-for-granted assumptions and myths of Modernity that hinder the understanding of other cultures, epistemologies, and ontologies—i.e., even when designers want to listen to the Other, the understanding is very limited. Therefore this course aims to enhance the student's capacity to listen to and collaborate with people from other cultures— recognizing and respecting differences in worldviews, cultural patterns, ways of knowing—to generate change., Students will be asked to create compelling visual communications, knowledge visualizations, and narratives to communicate the topics discussed in class and their visions of alternative futures to other people. The creative outputs will be assembled into an exhibit that will take place in one of CHE galleries and on a website., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, HA-HE, LAD-HE)

class: DEA 6030
class title: Graduate Practicum
description: For study that predominantly involves field experience in community settings. 

class: DEA 6040
class title: Future Body Craft: Fabricating On-Skin Interfaces
description: This course explores the intersectional field of Hybrid Body Craft, which applies design, engineering, and social science research for hybridizing emerging slim technology with body decoration practices. Examined through the lens of on-skin interfaces (i.e., smart tattoos and bandages) and electronic textiles in Human-Computer Interaction and Wearable Computing, students will develop prototyping skills in soft circuitry through tailored hands-on labs developed by the Hybrid Body Lab and critically reflect on representative papers in the field through readings and discussions. The skills students develop in the course will cumulate in the prototyping and design of a final project: a Future Body Craft of their choice.
outcome: Comprehend disciplines and fields: Develop an understanding of the state-of-the-art research in on-skin interfaces in Human-Computer Interaction and Wearable Computing., Apply multi-disciplinary perspectives: Identify and examine the relationship between design, technology, and the social sciences in conducting on-skin interface research., Think critically: Critique existing research, identify gaps in current investigations, pinpoint opportunities for future work., Innovate in research and design: Ideate, prototype, and build on-body interface projects in both individual and group settings., Write, speak and use visual communications effectively: Disseminate project results through verbal presentations, paper writeup, video production, and image representation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DEA 2730, DEA 3510/DEA 6510 or DEA 4700/DEA 6700.

class: DEA 6200
class title: Studies in Human-Environment Relations
description: This course is a seminar course intended for graduate students in Design and Environmental Analysis and graduate students in related fields. The course introduces students to the history, theories, and major research trends in the field of human-environment relations. Human environment relations refer to the interaction between the built environment and human behavior. The course draws upon literature from multiple disciplines, including environmental psychology, human factors/ergonomics, sociology, human development, facility planning, geography, and urban planning.
outcome: Grounding in disciplines and fields: Students will understand the historical foundations of the field of human-environment relations; students will apply major theories, conceptual frameworks, and research in the field of human-environment relations., Multidisciplinary perspectives: Through readings and discussions, students will learn and understand the various academic areas of study that contribute to the field of human-environment relations., Critical Thinking: Students will critically analyze and evaluate the research evidence from key areas of human-environment relations. Students will be prepared for future course work and research in this field., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)

class: DEA 6210
class title: Architectural Robotics
description: Embedding robotics into the fabric of the built environment fosters a more interactive and potentially more intimate relationship between the spaces we live in and us, and represents a new frontier for design, computing, and psychology. Part-seminar, part-lab, this course considers the design, technical, social, ecological, and ethical challenges and opportunities of architectural robotics.
outcome: To understand the design, technological, social, ecological, and ethical challenges and opportunities of architectural robotics., To conceptualize and evaluate design alternatives responsive to the challenges and opportunities of an ecosystem that is biological, artificial, and increasingly digital, using a variety of design and evaluation strategies., To iteratively design an Architectural Robotic room at model scale and demonstrate an ability to do so in class presentations and a video., To demonstrate, in a written report, an ability to communicate the motivations for, iterative development of, and expected use of the Architectural Robotic room that was prototyped, as well as assess its shortcomings., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, HA-HE, KCM-HE, LAD-HE, SBA-HE)

class: DEA 6500
class title: Problem-Seeking through Programming
description: Each student is required to attend DEA 4590 lectures, complete all required readings and assignments, and meet with the instructor and with other graduate students. An additional programming project is required for all graduate students.
outcome: Students will be able to identify different design programming methods and understanding key issues to consider in selecting and implementing a particular programming approach through lectures, readings, and hands-on exercise (grounding in disciplines and fields)., Students will utilize social science research, facility management skills, and design concepts to develop a program of space requirements (multidisciplinary perspectives)., Students will be able to develop critical success factors in developing and managing an effective programming process by participating in a major programming project for a real client (critical thinking)., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE, SBA-HE)

class: DEA 6510
class title: Human Factors and Inclusive Design
description: Intended for graduate students who want a more thorough grounding in human factors than is provided by DEA 3510. Implications of human physical and physiological characteristics and limitations on the design of settings, products, and tasks. An introduction to engineering anthropometry, biomechanics, control/display design, work physiology, and motor performance. Includes practical exercises and field project work.
outcome: Define key concepts and be familiar with terminology in human information processing, physiological and person-technology models for ergonomic design., Conduct and report on an ergonomic analysis of a product or system and undertake a comparative analysis., Apply critical skills and knowledge to improve the ergonomic design of a product or system and report on this., 

class: DEA 6520
class title: The Ambient Environment
description: DEA 6520 is intended for graduate students who want a more thorough grounding in human factors considerations than is provided by DEA 3500. Introduces human-factor considerations in lighting, acoustics, noise control, indoor air quality and ventilation, and the thermal environment. Views the ambient environment as a support system that should promote human efficiency, productivity, health, and safety. Emphasizes the implications for planning, design, and management of settings and facilities. 
outcome: Explore key concepts in each of the major topic areas covered i.e. indoor climate (thermal conditions, ventilation and air quality), indoor lighting, and indoor acoustics., Understand environmental measurement techniques and be familiar with methods., Understand how recent transformations in technology have influenced the design of the ambient environment, including the Ambient Intelligence (AmI) paradigm and its opportunities for designing intelligent environments., 

class: DEA 6530
class title: Planning and Managing the Workplace: Evidence-based Design and Organizational Ecology
description: Work environments have cultural, health, performance and economic implications for a society, community, organization, or individual. Workplace has transformed during the post pandemic era. The environmental, operational, social and cultural elements of the future workplace are in flux and the vision for the future workplace offers an opportunity for innovation and transformation. We will join industry leaders to collectively solve this paradigm. During the class, we will combine practical tools and scientific knowledge from  sychology, Organizational Behavior, User Experience Design, Systems Engineering, Human Factors, Cognitive Engineering, Human Centered Design and Architecture to create a  successful vision for the high performing workplace of the future.
 
outcome: Learn about the latest science and practice in workplace design, operation, and management., Gain competency to assess and analyze forms of work and identify appropriate solutions to maximize the targeted outcomes (health, satisfaction, creativity, communication, safety, performance, and efficiency) through design, operation, and management (Design Project)., Direct one's own learning to seek the critical knowledge needed to solve problems using qualitative methods (Stakeholder Poster Project)., Practice creativity and synthesize the acquired knowledge of workplace design to generate innovative approaches to critical issues facing workers and employers (Innovation Project)., Develop written, spoken, and visual communication skills to communicate complex topics., 

class: DEA 6560
class title: Research Methods in Social Sciences
description: For graduate students who want to gain an understanding of research design and methods. Course begins with fundamentals of research design and covers internal and external validity, measurement reliability and validity, and a variety of tools and techniques.
outcome: Comprehend terminology and logic of research design., Design and conduct research of your own, with an understanding of your study's strength and limitations., Critically analyze others' research design, methods, and conclusions., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)

class: DEA 7100
class title: DEA Graduate Pro Seminar
description: This pro seminar meets once per week, and consists of professional development workshops (e.g., grant writing, scholarly presentations, research communications, IRB, nonacademic career) as well as student presentations of thesis development. The goal is to support young graduate students optimize their graduate experience at Cornell.

class: DEA 8990
class title: Master's Thesis and Research
description: Thesis research for Design + Environmental Analysis (DEA) master's students.

class: DEA 9990
class title: Ph.D. Thesis and Research
description: Dissertation research for Design + Environmental Analysis (DEA) Ph.D. students.

class: DESIGN 4197
class title: Special Topics in Design
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of design. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.

class: DESIGN 6151
class title: Design and Making Across Disciplines I
description: This course is an introduction to fundamental concepts and methods in design and emerging technologies across architecture, engineering, and science to prepare students with the necessary tools and knowledge for iterative, hybrid, and synthetic thinking in design &amp; making across disciplines.

class: DESIGN 6197
class title: Special Topics in Design
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of design. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content. Topics vary each semester.

class: DESIGN 6297
class title: Coding for Design I
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to the subject of design and coding. The instructor(s) of the course are drawn from the permanent and visiting faculty who may either broadly or narrowly define the course's scope and content.
outcome: Demonstrate introductory understanding of computational design, including key techniques, theory, and concepts., Develop introductory skills in coding., Demonstrate ability to develop digital tools for design applications., Demonstrate introductory understanding of computational geometry and computer graphics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing, or permission of instructor.

class: DESIGN 6397
class title: Design for Physical Interaction I
description: This course provides an introduction to the human-centered and technical workings behind interactive devices ranging from cell phones and video controllers to household appliances and smart cars. This is a hands-on, lab-based course. Topics include electronics prototyping, interface prototyping, sensors and actuators, microcontroller development, physical prototyping, and user testing.
outcome: Demonstrate understanding of key computation, sensing, actuation, and communication components that make up modern interactive devices., Develop skill in designing and prototyping interactive systems., Demonstrate ability to test interactive systems with users., Demonstrate ability to integrate software, embedded hardware, sensing, display, actuation, and communication devices to make functioning systems., Apply open-source software libraries to control system operation, obtain user input and provide interactive response., 

class: DUTCH 1210
class title: Elementary Dutch I
description: In this course, you will learn the fundamentals of grammar, reading, speaking, and comprehension of the spoken language. You will gain intensive practice in listening, speaking, reading, and writing basic Dutch in meaningful, everyday contexts. Through the language you will get acquainted with the country, its society and its people. During the spring term, supplementary reading is selected according to individual needs. At the end of the course, you will be able to understand basic Dutch and make yourself understood in everyday situations.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: DUTCH 2030
class title: Intermediate Dutch I
description: In this course, the increased use of authentic texts will help you to expand your knowledge of Dutch culture and increase proficiency in the language. Discussions, compositions, reading articles, watching Dutch television and contact with native speakers will result in improved control of Dutch grammatical structures and vocabulary.  After completing this course, you will have a solid basis to understand both spoken and written Dutch and will be well on your way to become fluent in the language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DUTCH 1220  or equivalent.

class: DUTCH 3020
class title: Advanced Dutch I
description: This advanced course is centered around different aspects of Amsterdam. Each class focuses on a specific topic, such as Amsterdam as a cultural center and the country's capital, modes of transportation, architecture, immigration issues and history of Amsterdam. Students will read texts at home and discuss them in class; regularly read Amsterdam's newspaper Het Parool; watch short TV clips. At the end of each class, we will watch an episode of a popular Dutch TV show which has Amsterdam as its center; students will write a blog about each episode and design a wiki about Amsterdam. Attention will be paid to advanced grammar issues and vocabulary.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: DUTCH 2040  or equivalent.

class: EAS 1101
class title: Climate and Energy: a 21st Century Earth Science Perspective
description: Most people alive today will face unprecedented challenges and opportunities at the intersection of climate change and global energy demand. These two issues are inexorably linked to each other, and to virtually all global health and development "grand challenges." Fundamentally, this course asks how we humans, as a species, found our way in to the current bottleneck of climate and energy challenges, and how we, as a society, might find solutions that guarantee future generations can enjoy a stable climate, a secure and nutritious food supply, and access to clean energy. Students learn the fundamental background that they will need to be an informed citizen on these timely and extremely important issues.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, PHS-AS) (CA-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 1220
class title: Earthquake!
description: Explores the science of natural hazards, their societal impacts, and means of mitigation. The focus is on earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami, but hurricanes, severe weather, climate change, landslides, wildfires, and the threat of extinction from a future impact by an extraterrestrial body are also considered.
outcome: Understand the impact of natural hazards on society and its infrastructure., Be able to analyze and interpret geological and geophysical datasets in the context of their role in hazard assessment., 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 1310
class title: Basic Principles of Meteorology
description: Simplified treatment of the structure of the atmosphere: heat balance of the Earth; general and secondary circulations; air masses, fronts, and cyclones; and hurricanes, thunderstorms, tornadoes, and atmospheric condensation. The optional 1-credit laboratory for the course is offered as EAS 1330.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 1330
class title: Basic Meteorology Lab
description: Required for atmospheric science majors but is optional for other students taking EAS 1310.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: EAS 1310.

class: EAS 1540
class title: Introductory Oceanography
description: This class relies more on intuitive reasoning rather than complicated mathematical formulas to convey basic concepts about how the ocean works. For this reason, the class is very accessible to non-science majors. The class covers standard material about how the ocean works, but also includes current environmental threats facing the ocean such as global warming, ocean acidification, overfishing and coastal pollution. Students will gain a depth of knowledge about the ocean and global warming to enable them to speak and write confidently about contemporary public issues regarding the health of the ocean, global warming and a sustainable future. This course satisfies the Physical and Biological Sciences (PBS) requirement for students in most colleges. For students in A&amp;S and CALS, this course counts as "in-college" credit.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 1560
class title: Introductory Oceanography with Laboratory
description: This class relies more on intuitive reasoning rather than complicated mathematical formulas to convey basic concepts about how the ocean works. For this reason, the class is very accessible to non-science majors. The class covers standard material about how the ocean works, but also includes current environmental threats facing the ocean such as global warming, ocean acidification, overfishing and coastal pollution. Students will gain a depth of knowledge about the ocean and global warming to enable them to speak and write confidently about contemporary public issues regarding the health of the ocean, global warming and a sustainable future. This course satisfies the Physical and Biological Sciences (PBS) requirement for students in most colleges and the Introductory Life Sciences/Biological Sciences requirement for students in CALS. For students in A&amp;S and CALS, this course counts as "in-college" credit. This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 1600
class title: Environmental Physics
description: Fundamentals of radiation, thermodynamics, and mechanics will be introduced and used to understand energy and mass transfers in natural and built environments. Students will describe, identify and use basic principles of physics to discuss and assess renewable energy systems and solve environmental physics problems, using a physics vocabulary and appropriately quantifying results. The course is offered in the spring semester as a flipped class, meeting twice weekly. The course is offered in the fall semester as a web-based, online course and covers the same material.
outcome: Describe, identify, and use the basic principles of physics associated with energy and mass budgets and transfers as applied to the Earth's natural and built environment., Discuss, assess, and solve environmental physics problems, using a physics vocabulary and appropriately quantifying results., 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: mathematics through high school trigonometry.

class: EAS 2250
class title: The Earth System
description: EAS 2250 provides a broad math-, physics-, and chemistry-based introduction to the earth sciences, including geology, paleontology, oceanography, and atmospheric science. Topics covered include formation of the Earth, the chemistry and physics of the Earth's interior, plate tectonics, weathering and erosion, soil development, stream and groundwater flow, volcanism and crustal deformation, the evolution of life, ocean and atmospheric structure, circulation and heat transport, ocean waves and tides, generation of storms, seawater chemistry, mineral and energy resources, and climate change.
outcome: Describe and use the scientific process; i.e. explain how theories are built upon observations and how both are tested and revised. Be able to give Earth-related examples of this process., Explain how fundamental physical, chemical, and biological principles shape the planet Earth, providing concrete examples., Explain the place of the Earth in the cosmos: specifically how and when it formed, and how it continues to evolve through processes such as plate tectonics, erosion and sedimentation, etc. Describe the key observations that have led scientists to this present theory of Earth., Describe the history of life on Earth and explain how natural selection and evolution has led to the current diversity of organisms on Earth, including man. Explain how life has affected and changed the Earth., Be able to participate knowledgeably and intelligently in discussions of public policy related to earth science, particularly with respect to hazards, such as earthquakes and volcanoes, and resources such as water, mineral deposits, hydrocarbons, etc.; and the impact of man's activities on the Earth, particularly including climate change., 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or MATH 1910.

class: EAS 2900
class title: Introduction to Programming for Meteorology and Climate Science
description: Introduction to Python programming and visualization specifically tailored to applications in meteorology and climate science. Topics include: basic Python programming, data manipulation, and instruction in the use of scientific analysis and visualization packages such as numpy, pandas, xarray, cartopy, and metpy.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: EAS 1310 and MATH 1110, or equivalent.

class: EAS 3010
class title: Evolution of the Earth System
description: Life activities alter the physical and chemical environment of Earth's surface and are altered by that environment, while physical and chemical processes transform rock, transfer material, and create new rocks that record Earth's environmental history. The interactions over very long times constitute a coevolution of Earth and Life. Course uses modern systems and ancient systems to illustrate principles, methods of reconstructing deep history, and the context of natural change inherent to life and earth.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: EAS 2250 and MATH 1110 or MATH 1910 and one course in chemistry (high school or college).

class: EAS 3030
class title: Introduction to Biogeochemistry
description: Control and function of the Earth's global biogeochemical cycles. Begins with a review of the basic inorganic and organic chemistry of biologically significant elements, and then considers the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, nutrients, and metals that take place in soil, sediments, rivers, and the oceans. Topics include weathering, acid-base chemistry, biological redox processes, nutrient cycling and limitation, trace gas fluxes, bio-active metals, the use of isotopic tracers, controls on atmospheric carbon dioxide, and carbon cycle models. Interactions between global biogeochemical cycles and other components of the Earth system are discussed. Co-enrollment in one lab/discussion section per week is required.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or equivalent, MATH 1120, and a course in biology and/or geology.

class: EAS 3050
class title: Climate Dynamics
description: Discusses processes that determine climate and contribute to its change, including atmospheric radiation, ocean circulation, and atmospheric dynamics. Investigates contemporary climate change issues and discusses them in the context of natural variability of the system.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two semesters of calculus and one semester of physics.

class: EAS 3410
class title: Atmospheric Thermodynamics and Hydrostatics
description: Introduction to the thermodynamics and hydrostatics of the atmosphere and to the methods of description and quantitative analysis used in meteorology. Topics include thermodynamic processes of dry air, water vapor, and moist air and concepts of hydrostatics and stability.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of calculus and one semester of physics.

class: EAS 3450
class title: Environmental Geophysics
description: Fundamentals of subsurface imaging by geophysical methods as used in oil exploration and environmental investigations. Covers seismic reflection, refraction, gravity, magnetics, resistivity, and ground-penetrating radar (GPR) techniques.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and PHYS 2208 or PHYS 2213, or equivalent.

class: EAS 3555
class title: Marine Microbes and Disease in a Changing Ocean
description: Marine microorganisms fuel globally significant elemental cycles through their activities. They also drive diseases in multicellular life through pathogenesis, modulation of host-associated microbiomes, and through induction of stressors (e.g. toxins, hypoxia). The purpose of this course is to provide junior- and senior-level students a background in biological oceanography, marine microbial ecology, biogeochemistry, and disease pathogenesis in marine habitats. The emphasis of the course is on understanding how biology affects and is affected by the oceans, and how organisms interact to produce ocean biological phenomena. The course is divided into 4 modules: 1) Marine microbial diversity and ocean structure; 2) Ocean biogeochemistry; 3) Marine disease pathogenesis; and 4) Pollution and climate change. This course will equip students with foundations for further undergraduate courses in ocean sciences and environmental dynamics, and for graduate studies in biological oceanography and marine biology.
outcome: Describe the taxonomic and functional diversity of marine microorganisms in both natural and human influenced habitats of the ocean., Examine the contributions of each group of marine organisms, from viruses through metazoa, to overall ecosystem function and elemental cycling., Access the current threats to marine ecosystems on local and global scales through pollution and climate change., Describe how microorganisms cause disease and how diseases influence marine ecosystems., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOEE 1610, BIOEE 1780.

class: EAS 4010
class title: Fundamentals of Energy and Mineral Resources
description: The sustainable development of humanity requires natural resources for the basics of life and for increasing global standards of living. Minerals and energy are critical for human existence now and for future generations, and so new resources must be discovered, developed efficiently, and kept in the circular economy through reuse and recycling. Discovery means fully understanding the Earth, including the geological processes that concentrate resources in the subsurface and the surficial conditions that may challenge resource extraction. Realistic estimates needed for future consumption include changing global demand and new technologies. Finally, we need to be aware of the social and political dimensions of mineral and energy resource management that regulate and control aspects of resource-related social development.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: previous course in geology.

class: EAS 4060
class title: Geodesy
description: Explores the methods and applications of geodesy by focusing heavily on Global Satellite Navigation Network (GNSS) data and Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar data (InSAR).  The course covers some of the key principles of geodesy, including how to describe and measure the shape of the Earth, how to find, select and process data of a range of types, and applications to problems relating to ground displacement (e.g., volcanoes, earthquakes, extraction of groundwater) and surface processes/characteristics (e.g., soil moisture, vegetation).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: calculus, calculus-based physics, introductory programming class, and at least one course in Earth Sciences, or permission of instructor.

class: EAS 4510
class title: Synoptic Meteorology II
description: Structure and dynamics of large-scale midlatitude weather systems, such as cyclones, anticyclones, and waves, with consideration of processes that contribute to temperature changes and precipitation. Lab sessions involve real-time weather forecasting and the application of a numerical model of the atmosphere to the study of selected large-scale midlatitude weather events.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: EAS 3410 and EAS 3420 or equivalent.

class: EAS 4550
class title: Geochemistry
description: Chemistry applied to understanding the Earth and the Solar System including its formation and evolution, and processes occurring on the Earth's surface and in its interior. The course covers thermodynamics and kinetics of geochemical processes, aquatic and environmental chemistry, geochronology, trace element and isotope geochemistry, paleoclimatology, and the carbon cycle and organic geochemistry.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090 or equivalent.

class: EAS 4580
class title: Volcanology
description: Volcanic rocks constitute a significant component of the surface of all the terrestrial planets. Volcanoes are the main location of mass and energy exchange between the external and internal parts of our planet, making volcanic processes key not only for the physical and chemical evolution of the planet, but also to the evolution of climate and life. This course incorporates the physics and chemistry of magmatic processes related to volcanic activity in several modules followed by exercises done in class and complemented by weekly assignments.
outcome: Identify, describe and interpret the different volcanic deposits in the geologic record., Interpret the physical mechanisms by which magmas are produced, transport through the mantle and crust, and erupt at the surface., Understand the role of volcanism in planetary evolution., Evaluate the hazards and risks to human populations and the environment associated with volcanic processes., 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: EAS 4590
class title: Earthquake Physics

class: EAS 4800
class title: Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Global Change
description: This course investigates the science of atmospheric chemistry as its relation to air pollution and global change. Students examine the chemistry and physics that determines atmospheric composition on local to global scales including the effects of biogeochemistry and atmospheric photochemistry.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090, MATH 1920, and PHYS 1112 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: EAS 4840
class title: Inverse Methods in the Natural Sciences
description: An exploration of solution methods for inverse problems with examples taken from geophysics and related fields, with particular attention to making inferences from inaccurate, incomplete, or inconsistent physical data. Applications include medical and seismic tomography, earthquake location, image processing, and radio/radar imaging. Linear algebra (including condition numbers) and probability and statistics (including error analysis, Bayes theorem, Gibbs distribution, and Markov chains) are reviewed. Methods covered include nonlinear least-squares, maximum likelihood methods, and local and global optimization methods, including simulated annealing and genetic algorithms.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940.

class: EAS 4910
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Introduction to the techniques and philosophy of research in the earth sciences and an opportunity for undergraduates to participate in current faculty research projects. Topics chosen in consultation with, and guided by, a faculty member. A short written report is required, and outstanding projects are prepared for publication.

class: EAS 4940
class title: Special Topics in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the beginning of the semester.

class: EAS 4960
class title: Internship Experience
description: Students with internship opportunities may be able to receive credit through this course.

class: EAS 4970
class title: Individual Study in Atmospheric Science
description: Topics are arranged at the beginning of the semester for individual study or for group discussions.

class: EAS 4980
class title: Teaching Experience in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
description: The student assists in teaching an EAS course appropriate to his or her previous training. The student meets with a discussion or laboratory section, prepares course materials, grades assignments, and regularly discusses course objectives and teaching techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.

class: EAS 5000
class title: Master Engineering Design Project
description: Project with significant engineering content that is required for the M.Eng. program.

class: EAS 5051
class title: Climate Dynamics
description: Discusses processes that determine climate and contribute to its change, including atmospheric radiation, ocean circulation, and atmospheric dynamics. Investigates contemporary climate change issues and discusses them in the context of natural variability of the system.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two semesters of calculus and one semester of physics.

class: EAS 5060
class title: EAS Workshops on How to Succeed

class: EAS 5450
class title: Environmental Geophysics
description: Fundamentals of subsurface imaging by geophysical methods as used in oil exploration and environmental investigations. Covers seismic reflection, refraction, gravity, magnetics, resistivity, and ground-penetrating radar (GPR) techniques.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and PHYS 2208 or PHYS 2213, or equivalent.

class: EAS 5840
class title: Inverse Methods in the Natural Sciences
description: An exploration of solution methods for inverse problems with examples taken from geophysics and related fields, with particular attention to making inferences from inaccurate, incomplete, or inconsistent physical data. Applications include medical and seismic tomography, earthquake location, image processing, and radio/radar imaging. Linear algebra (including condition numbers) and probability and statistics (including error analysis, Bayes theorem, Gibbs distribution, and Markov chains) are reviewed. Methods covered include nonlinear least-squares, maximum likelihood methods, and local and global optimization methods, including simulated annealing and genetic algorithms.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940.

class: EAS 6550
class title: Geochemistry
description: Chemistry applied to understanding the Earth and the Solar System including its formation and evolution, and processes occurring on the Earth's surface and in its interior. The course covers thermodynamics and kinetics of geochemical processes, aquatic and environmental chemistry, geochronology, trace element and isotope geochemistry, paleoclimatology, and the carbon cycle and organic geochemistry.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090 or equivalent.

class: EAS 6580
class title: Volcanology
description: Volcanic rocks constitute a significant component of the surface of all the terrestrial planets. Volcanoes are the main location of mass and energy exchange between the external and internal parts of our planet, making volcanic processes key not only for the physical and chemical evolution of the planet, but also to the evolution of climate and life. This course incorporates the physics and chemistry of magmatic processes related to volcanic activity in several modules followed by exercises done in class and complemented by weekly assignments.
outcome: Identify, describe and interpret the different volcanic deposits in the geologic record., Interpret the physical mechanisms by which magmas are produced, transport through the mantle and crust, and erupt at the surface., Understand the role of volcanism in planetary evolution., Evaluate the hazards and risks to human populations and the environment associated with volcanic processes., 

class: EAS 6590
class title: Earthquake Physics

class: EAS 6800
class title: Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Global Change
description: This course investigates the science of atmospheric chemistry as its relation to air pollution and global change. Students examine the chemistry and physics that determines atmospheric composition on local to global scales including the effects of biogeochemistry and atmospheric photochemistry.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090, MATH 1920, and PHYS 1112 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: EAS 6920
class title: Special Topics in Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
description: Study of topics in earth and atmospheric science that are more specialized or different from other courses. Special topics depend on staff and student interests.

class: EAS 7010
class title: Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for geological sciences graduate students.

class: EAS 7800
class title: Earthquake Record Reading
description: Analysis and interpretation of real-time geophysical data focusing on interesting and significant events that happen during the semester, emphasizing seismogram interpretation of large earthquakes.

class: EAS 7910
class title: Atmospheric Science Seminar

class: EAS 7930
class title: Earth Science Seminar
description: Seminar course for graduate students in geological sciences with topics in tectonics, seismology, petrology, and similar disciplines. Emphasis on mountain belts, but other topics entertained.

class: EAS 8500
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research in Atmospheric Science
description: Thesis research for atmospheric science master's students.

class: EAS 9500
class title: Graduate-Level Dissertation Research in Atmospheric Science
description: Dissertation research for atmospheric science Ph.D. students only before "A" exam has been passed.

class: EAS 9510
class title: Doctoral-Level Dissertation Research in Atmospheric Science
description: Dissertation research for atmospheric science Ph.D. students after "A" exam has been passed.

class: ECE 2100
class title: Introduction to Circuits for Electrical and Computer Engineers
description: This course is an introduction to electronic circuits. We start with the basic quantities used to characterize circuit operation (like current, voltage, and power) and then enforce several physical laws to form the basis of our approach to circuit analysis. Networks comprising passive circuit elements such as resistors, inductors, and capacitors will be examined under constant dc, transient, and sinusoidal steady-state conditions. Active components including transistors and Op-Amps will be introduced and used to build simple amplifiers and switching power converters. Many of these ideas will be unified mathematically through the use of Laplace transforms and associated transfer functions. In the lab part of the course, we will learn how to use modern instruments to test circuits, and explore the concepts from lecture applied to real circuits. Finally, we will develop some simple modeling software in MATLAB to numerically predict the results from analysis and experiment.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 or PHYS 1112. Corequisite: MATH 2930 or PHYS 2213.

class: ECE 2300
class title: Digital Logic and Computer Organization
description: This course provides an introduction to the design and implementation of digital circuits and microprocessors. Topics include transistor network design, Boolean algebra, combinational circuits, sequential circuits, finite state machine design, processor pipelines, and memory hierarchy. Design methodology using both discrete components and hardware description languages is covered in the laboratory portion of the course.
outcome: Understand Boolean logic and state machines as theoretical foundations of digital systems., Be able to conceive, analyze, design, and build combinational and sequential digital logic solutions to everyday problems., Comprehend the basic structure and functionality of ROM and RAM memories., Understand the basic structure and functionality of central processing units, and build a simple one using FPGAs., Understand the structure and operation of memory hierarchies and input/output systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or CS 1112.

class: ECE 2720
class title: Data Science for Engineers
description: An introduction to data science for engineers. The data science workflow: acquisition and cleansing, exploration and modeling, prediction and decision making, visualization and presentation. Tools for data science including numerical optimization, the Discrete Fourier Transform, Principal Component Analysis, and probability with a focus on statistical inference and correlation methods. Techniques for different steps in the workflow including outlier detection, filtering, regression, classification, and techniques for avoiding overfitting. Methods for combining domain-agnostic data analysis tools with the types of domain-specific knowledge that are common in engineering. Ethical considerations. Optional topics include classification via neural networks, outlier detection, and Markov chains. Programming projects in Python.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and either CS 1110 or CS 1112. Corequisite: MATH 2940.

class: ECE 3030
class title: Electromagnetic Fields and Waves
description: Covers static, quasi-static, and dynamic electromagnetic fields and waves. Topics include Maxwell's equations (integral and differential forms), fields of charge and current distributions, boundary conditions, fields near conductors, method of images, material polarization and dielectrics; energy, work, and power in electromagnetic systems; wave propagation and polarization, waves in media (dielectrics, conductors, and anisotropic materials); reflection, transmission, and refraction at media interfaces; guided waves in transmission lines, Smith charts, transients; metallic and dielectric waveguides; radiation and antennas, antenna arrays, electric circuits for transmission and reception, aperture antennas and diffraction.
outcome: Be able to use vector calculus to solve Maxwell's Equations describing the electromagnetic static and dynamic fields in a variety of geometries and coordinate systems., Be able to analyze electromagnetic wave propagation in free space and in different materials., Be able to analyze electromagnetic wave propagation through guiding structures (metal and dielectric waveguides and transmission lines) under various loading conditions, and design impedance matching circuits for optimum power transfer., Be able to analyze and design wire antennas, arrays and dishes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2213, MATH 2930, ECE 2100/ENGRD 2100.

class: ECE 3250
class title: Signals and Systems
description: Course aims to provide students with a rigorous treatment of the fundamentals of discrete- and continuous-time signals and systems. The course makes use of sophisticated tools such as vector spaces of signals (e.g. bounded, summable, and square-summable signals) and orthogonal expansions in Hilbert space in addition to covering standard material on time- and frequency-domain analysis of signals and systems, including discrete- and continuous-time convolution, Fourier series, continuous- and discrete-time Fourier transforms, sampling theory, the DFT and FFT, and spectrograms. Homework assignments include a computational component where appropriate.
outcome: Help students achieve a sophisticated understanding of fundamental signals and systems concepts., Help students achieve a facility with sophisticated signal-analysis tools useful in applications to ECE and beyond., Help students attain an appreciation of the central role that advanced mathematics plays in modeling, analysis, and design of engineering systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930, MATH 2940, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 4060
class title: Quantum Physics and Engineering
description: Introduction to quantum physics and engineering for advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate students. Topics covered include historical developments, quantum postulates, Schrodinger equation, quantum states and observables, measurement in quantum mechanics, quantum confined states in potential wells and atoms, quantum tunneling, uncertainty relations, Dirac notation, angular momentum and spin, quantum dynamics, time-independent and time-dependent perturbation theories, quantum two-level systems, quantum information and the qubit, quantum computation and quantum circuits, identical particles, quantum statistics for fermions and bosons, fundamentals of quantum statistical physics, quantization of light and the photon, quantization of simple mechanical and electrical superconducting circuits. The course will enable students to take advanced courses in areas related to electronic and optical devices, solid state physics and material science, and quantum information and computation.      
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2214, MATH 2930, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 4110
class title: Random Signals in Communications and Signal Processing
description: Introduction to models for random signals in discrete and continuous time; Markov chains, Poisson process, queuing processes, power spectral densities, Gaussian random process. Response of linear systems to random signals. Elements of estimation and inference as they arise in communications and digital signal processing systems.
outcome: Knowledge of a variety of mathematical models for random phenomena., Ability to classify models with respect to stationarity, Markov property, asymptotics, and more., Ability to make optimal inferences and estimates with respect to such criteria as minimum error probability, and minimum mean square error., Become aware of applications to communications, machine learning, statistical physics and more., Response of linear systems to random process inputs (time permitting)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2720, ECE 3100, and ECE 3250 or equivalents.

class: ECE 4230
class title: Computer Vision
description: A first course in computer vision for advanced undergraduate students; that is, the analysis by computer of multidimensional signals provided by imaging sensors including image sequences and three-dimensional images for primarily autonomous applications. Basic techniques for image processing and feature extraction are covered in lectures; topics include image formation, image filtering, edge detection, region growing, shape description, and machine learning for computer vision. Machine learning methods including convolution neural networks, deep learning models for focus attention and image segmentation. The course focus is on the machine interpretation of images for autonomous decision making.
outcome: Demonstrate an understanding of precision image review and annotation., Demonstrate an understanding of image filtering and image segmentation., Demonstrate an understanding of deep learning methods for object identification and region segmentation., Demonstrate a knowledge the image analysis methods. for image sequences and 3D images., Demonstrate a knowledge in computer vision algorithm design and development including a quantitative evaluation of algorithm performance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2720.

class: ECE 4240
class title: Robot Perception
description: An introductory course to robot perception techniques for modeling and planning heterogeneous and dynamic sensor measurements, and for processing the sensor feedback in the context of robot motions and environments. Methods for intelligent sensor fusion and robot perception in motion will be covered in detail in this course. Topics in artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering will be discussed along with related algorithms inspired by neural networks, Bayesian networks, and information theory. Sensing problems and performance will be investigated in regard to benchmark problems, such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting, will be covered in-depth and demonstrated through applications drawn from environmental monitoring, sensing-and-pursuit games, surveillance, and human-robot interactions.
outcome: Students will be able to use methods for sensor fusion to inform robot perception., Students will be able to implement artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering along with neural networks, Bayesian algorithms, and information theory to identify robot states., Students will be able to analyze benchmark problems such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2112, MATH 2940, and MATH 4710 (or ENGRD 2700 or ENGRD 2720), or graduate standing in a technical field.

class: ECE 4250
class title: Digital Signal Processing and Statistical Inference
description: This course introduces discrete-time signal and system models in deterministic and stochastic settings and develops signal processing and statistical inference methodologies for real-time sensing and control applications. The course is intended for upper-level undergraduate and beginning graduate engineering students in engineering departments.
outcome: Be able to obtain impulse response from frequency and state-space models and vice versa.  Be able to analyze system stability, reachability, and observability given a linear time-invariant state space model., Be able to design and implement state and observer-based feedback systems that stabilize an unstable system., Be able to understand stationary and wide-sense stationary models of discrete-time signal and the notion of power spectrum density of a wide-sense stationary process., Be able to solve signal estimation and detection problems under parametric and state-space models, including implementing Wiener and Kalman filtering techniques for estimation, and using matched filtering in signal detection., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and MATH 2940, ECE 3100, or equivalent course that satisfies ECE probability requirements, ECE 2720 and ECE 3250, or equivalent courses.

class: ECE 4320
class title: Integrated Micro Sensors and Actuators: Bridging the Physical and Digital Worlds
description: Introduction to micro and nano devices that allow the digital world to both sense and actuate in the physical world. Design and analysis of modern MEMS/NEMS (Micro/Nano Electromechanical Systems) touch, accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure, microphones, neural probe sensors. Design and analysis of electrostatic, piezoelectric, thermal, and magnetic actuators for frequency control and micro robotic applications. This is an interdisciplinary course drawing from mechanics, materials, solid state devices, CMOS electronics, and micro and nano fabrication. The students design, fabricate, and test a microsensor chip to implement class concepts.
outcome: Be able to design and model a digital app-based electronic interface to integrated sensors., Be able to model spring-mass equivalent models of micro/nano fabricated structures, using analysis and finite-element analysis software., Be able to use individual fabrication steps into a device fabrication process flow., Be able to design and model electromechanical models of planar surface micromachined accelerometers and gyroscopes., Be able to design membrane based sensors and actuators such as pressure monitors and microphones., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2100 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 4330
class title: Microwave Circuit Design
description: This course covers techniques to design and analyze microwave circuits. These techniques, in general, can be used for electrical devices with dimensions in the order of the operating wavelength. These devices are commonly used in RF/mm- wave wireless communication systems, quantum computing/sensing systems, and electromagnetic imaging/radar systems. Topics include planar transmission lines, network analysis, S-parameters, matching networks, resonators, power dividers/combiners, filters, and non-reciprocal devices. The course emphasizes physical understanding, intuitive design methods, and hands-on experience in using E+M simulation tools and microwave measurements.
outcome: Analyze important building blocks in microwave/millimeter wave systems., Design and optimize microwave components and understand the challenges in high operating frequency., Develop the ability to use E+M circuit simulators and perform microwave measurements., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3030 and ECE 3150.

class: ECE 4360
class title: Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics
description: This course will give an introduction to modern nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on integrated circuits manufacturing. Thermal budget, scaling of geometry, pitch and registry and control of parametric yield will be used for integration guidelines. Physical principles and process modeling will be covered in lectures and labs will include a series of fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing to produce semiconductor devices (Schottky diodes, pn junction diodes, MOS capacitors, and MOSFETs). Recent advances in nanofabrication will be briefly reviewed for their possible technology insertion and main integration challenges.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2620 or ECE 3150, or equivalent that covers basics on semiconductors and semiconductor devices, MATH 2930-MATH 2940, CHEM 2090.

class: ECE 4361
class title: Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics Laboratory
description: This course provides an introduction to nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on Si-based integrated circuits manufacturing as well as modern electronics based on GaN, 2D materials etc. The lab, primarily taught in the Cornell Teaching Cleanroom, includes basic fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing. A series of devices will be fabricated: solar cells, MOS capacitors and transistors, 2D transistors, GaN HEMTs and LEDs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: ECE 4360/MSE 5410, AEP 6620 or equivalents.

class: ECE 4450
class title: Computer Networks and Telecommunications
description: This is a senior-level course in information networking with an emphasis on wireless technology. Examples of topics include: 5G cellular, the latest WiFi standards, Bluetooth, routing and switching, congestion control, network security, and user privacy. Though the focus will be on communication networking technologies, downstream legal and social issues that arise from design decisions will be discussed.
outcome: Knowledge and understanding of how modern cellular technology, the Internet and other prominent technologies reached their current form., Ability to understand and analyze basic important algorithms in the Internet, such as congestion control and shortest path routing., Be able to understand the challenges that come with designing wireless networks and the tradeoff of corresponding solutions., Understand the limitation of current wired and wireless architectures. Be able to perform related analysis and design, and to predict future emphases as these technologies evolve., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3100.

class: ECE 4510
class title: Electric Power Systems I
description: Acquaints students with modern electric power system modeling, analysis and computation. Stresses analysis techniques appropriate for power system modeling, analysis and power flow computation. Topics include transmission line models, transformers and per unit system, generator models, network matrices, power flow analysis and computation, real and reactive power control, voltage control, economic dispatch.
outcome: Knowledge of a variety of mathematical models for power system components., Ability to classify such models as to issues of static model and dynamic model., Ability to make optimal inferences with respect to such criteria as minimum production cost and minimum emission (power flow and economic dispatch). Elements of optimal design are introduced., Response of power flow, bus voltage to power demand variations as well as power injection variations., Response of power system static behaviors to power system contingencies (such as line outages, transformer outages, generator tripping and huge load variations)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3250.

class: ECE 4530
class title: Analog Integrated Circuit Design
description: Overview of devices available to analog integrated-circuit designers in modern CMOS and BiCMOS processes: resistors, capacitors, MOS transistors, and bipolar transistors. Basic building blocks for linear analog integrated circuits: single-stage amplifiers, current mirrors, and differential pairs. Transistor-level design of linear analog integrated circuits, such as operational amplifiers and operational transconductance amplifiers. Layout techniques for analog integrated circuits. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on design-oriented analysis techniques.
outcome: Develop an understanding of device and circuit theory sufficient to estimate the low and high frequency behavior of linear circuits, including noise., Develop an intuition for analog circuit behavior in both linear and nonlinear operation., Be able to calculate transfer functions and Bode plots and use them to estimate the stability of an electronic system., Develop an ability to parse large circuits and systems into smaller, analyzable subunits, analyze them, and then apply the understanding gained from that process to analyze the system as a whole, including for noise and variation., Implement a circuit or subsystem at the transistor level to solve an open-ended problem and effectively communicate the constraints and critical aspects of that system., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150.

class: ECE 4560
class title: Power Electronics
description: Power electronics is an enabling technology for sustainable and energy efficient systems, as all renewable energy sources (including solar and wind) and efficient electrical loads (including LED lighting and electric vehicles) require a power electronic converter to interface them with the electrical grid. Power electronic converters, being inherently non-linear/time-variant circuits, cannot be analyzed using linear time-invariant (LTI) circuit analysis techniques, nor conventional small-signal linearization techniques taught in introductory circuits (ECE 2100) and microelectronics (ECE 3150) courses. This course, which will follow ECE 3150, will introduce advanced circuit analysis and modeling techniques required to predict the steady-state and dynamic behavior of power electronic converters. The course will also introduce seniors and first-year graduate students to other advanced topics which are required for the analysis and design of power converters, including power semiconductor device modeling, thermal modeling, magnetic component modeling, electromagnetic interference (EMI) filter design, and switching converter control design, at a level appropriate for them. This course will equip ECE students with the theoretical and practical skills needed to innovate in the area of power electronics, and allow them to succeed in graduate school and in the rapidly growing job market for power electronic engineers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150 or permission of instructor required.

class: ECE 4570
class title: Semiconductor Electronic and Photonic Devices
description: The class develops the fundamentals of semiconductor electronic and photonic devices that power today's computation, communication, and memory industries. It relates the basics of pn junctions to their applications in solar cells, light emitting diodes, and lasers. Majority and minority carrier transport in heterostructure bipolar transistors is related to gain and speed limits of amplifiers for 5G communications and beyond. Schottky diodes and their applications in power electronics, and in field effect transistors of many flavors ranging from Silicon CMOS and FinFETs to GaN high electron mobility transistors are covered. Tunneling transport, flash memory, and DRAM devices are discussed. The course uses industrially relevant simulation tools, and the laboratory component gives students firsthand experience of measuring and appreciating the power and the limitations of semiconductor devices, and the reason for their revolutionary influence on our lives and society.
outcome: Obtain a well-grounded understanding of semiconductor device operation and advanced ideas in use in microelectronic industry., Learn through simulations, the aspects of physical behavior that analytic solutions are incomplete at and their more complete description of operational physics., Apply device fundamentals and simulation techniques to design modern nanoscale device structures., Develop comprehensive skills straddling electronics, integration, and devices as used in integrated circuits leading to effective communication of results., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150 or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 4750
class title: Computer Architecture
description: This course aims to provide a strong foundation for students to understand modern computer system architecture and to apply these insights and principles to future computer designs. The course is structured around the three primary building blocks of general-purpose computing systems: processors, memories, and networks. The first half of the course focuses on the fundamentals of each building block. Topics include processor microcoding and pipelining; cache microarchitecture and optimization; and network topology, routing, and flow control. The second half of the course delves into more advanced techniques and will enable students to understand how these three building blocks can be integrated to build a modern shared-memory multicore system. Topics include superscalar execution, branch prediction, out-of-order execution, register renaming and memory disambiguation; VLIW, vector, and multithreaded processors; memory protection, translation, and virtualization; and memory synchronization, consistency, and coherence. This course includes a significant project decomposed into five lab assignments. Throughout the semester, students will gradually design, implement, test, and evaluate a complete multicore system capable of running real parallel applications at the register-transfer level.
outcome: Describe computer architecture concepts and mechanisms related to the design of modern processors, memories, and networks and explain how these concepts and mechanisms interact., Apply this understanding to new computer architecture design problems within the context of balancing application requirements against technology constraints; more specifically, quantitatively assess a design's execution time in cycles and qualitatively assess a design's cycle time, area, and energy., Evaluate various design alternatives and make a compelling quantitative and/or qualitative argument for why one design is superior to the other approaches., Demonstrate the ability to implement and verify designs of varying complexity at the register-transfer-levels., Create new designs at the register-transfer-level and the associated effective testing strategies., Write concise yet comprehensive technical reports that describe designs implemented at the register-transfer-levels, explain the testing strategy used to verify functionality, and evaluate the designs to determine the superior approach., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3140/CS 3420 or CS 3410. Students should feel comfortable working with a hardware description language such as Verilog, SystemVerilog, or VHDL.

class: ECE 4770
class title: Foundations of Robotics
description: Robotics is interdisciplinary and draws inspiration from many different fields towards solving a variety of tasks in real-world environments using physical systems. This course is a challenging introduction to basic computational concepts used broadly in robotics. By the end of this course, students should have a fundamental understanding of how the different sub-fields of robotics such as kinematics, state-estimation, motion planning, and controls come together to develop intelligent behaviors in physical robotic systems. The mathematical basis of each area will be emphasized, and concepts will be motivated using common robotics applications. Students will be evaluated using a mixture of theoretical and programming exercises throughout the semester. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110, and the following or their equivalents: CS 2800, MATH 1920, MATH 2940.

class: ECE 4800
class title: Optimal System Analysis and Design
description: Introduction to optimization theory and algorithms for system analysis and design. Topics include linear programming, convex programming, duality. We may touch dynamic programming around the end if time permits. Application will be discussed in various areas including geometric problems, networks, control, circuits, signal processing, and communications.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920, MATH 2940. Highly recommended corequisite: ECE 3250.

class: ECE 4920
class title: ECE Technical Writing
description: Technical writing aimed at having students write up their ECE projects in a formal fashion, with a view to publication. Projects may be existing, or may be created as part of the independent study, but the writing requirement will match the current College technical writing requirement.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 4760 or ECE 5760.

class: ECE 4980
class title: Supervised Teaching Experience
description: This course is designed to give qualified undergraduates experience through actual involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of department faculty. Students cannot receive both pay and credit for the same hours of preparation and teaching. Enrollment is with permission of instructor only. One credit of ECE 4980 is equivalent to 5 weekly work hours, including both student contact hours and preparatory/other time.

class: ECE 4999
class title: Electrical and Computer Engineering Independent Projects
description: Individual study or directed reading in connection with a special engineering problem chosen by the student after consultation with the faculty member directing the project. An engineering report on the project is required. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor.

class: ECE 5010
class title: Professional Seminar for M.Eng. Students
description: This seminar introduces students to professional issues that are important as they begin their professional career. Topics include M.Eng. ECE project options; professional expectations; project planning and management; effective teamwork; technical writing and communications; impact of environmental, economic, and societal constraints in design; entrepreneurship possibilities; and career planning issues.

class: ECE 5110
class title: Random Signals in Communications and Signal Processing
description: Introduction to models for random signals in discrete and continuous time; Markov chains, Poisson process, queuing processes, power spectral densities, Gaussian random process. Response of linear systems to random signals. Elements of estimation and inference as they arise in communications and digital signal processing systems.
outcome: Knowledge of a variety of mathematical models for random phenomena., Ability to classify models with respect to stationarity, Markov property, asymptotics, and more., Ability to make optimal inferences and estimates with respect to such criteria as minimum error probability, and minimum mean square error., Become aware of applications to communications, machine learning, statistical physics and more., Response of linear systems to random process inputs (time permitting)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2720, ECE 3100, and ECE 3250 or equivalents.

class: ECE 5120
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: enrollment in group-based project with strong system design component approved by course instructor.

class: ECE 5235
class title: Sustainable Urban and Energy Delivery Systems
description: The course focuses on how to transition from legacy energy delivery infrastructures dependent on fossil fuel to a sustainable decarbonized grid that harnesses distributed renewable energy resources and responsive demand from buildings, electrified transportation systems, and industrial loads. The content includes models and abstractions for the architecture of the cyber-physical energy system, its economics, and future evolution, and numerical optimization and learning methods in support of the infrastructure's safety critical operations in the legacy system and in the future architecture. At the MSc level the students will focus on learning how to use tools and data while at the graduate level the students will be asked to also solve problems, formulate novel solutions, interpret results. Similarly, to differentiate the MSc from PhD level and course outcomes, the final project will require the MSc students to pick one out of a set of predefined problems while the PhD students will have to define an original problem and solution.
outcome: Students will be able to identify technical and operational models for energy delivery systems and appreciate why energy consumption in urban environments is bound to continue to be the most significant source of emissions under the status quo., Students will learn about and analyze emerging technological solutions in wide area sensing and IoT networks, machine learning and decision models that support the coordination the distributed renewable resources on the supply side with the flexible demand of electricity in urban environments., Students will identify security challenges that are unique of cyber-physical infrastructures and need to be addressed to advance to rip the benefits of digital technology in the field., Through assignments and projects, the students will gain hands-on experience in demonstrating on how to apply novel data models, network technology and software tools that encompass the various topics covered in the class., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: coursework in ML, data science, law and policy or ethics, calculus and algebra, algorithms, and python programming. Recommended prerequisite: coursework in theory and optimization.

class: ECE 5240
class title: Robot Perception
description: An introductory course to robot perception techniques for modeling and planning heterogeneous and dynamic sensor measurements, and for processing the sensor feedback in the context of robot motions and environments. Methods for intelligent sensor fusion and robot perception in motion will be covered in detail in this course. Topics in artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering will be discussed along with related algorithms inspired by neural networks, Bayesian networks, and information theory. Sensing problems and performance will be investigated in regard to benchmark problems, such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting, will be covered in-depth and demonstrated through applications drawn from environmental monitoring, sensing-and-pursuit games, surveillance, and human-robot interactions.
outcome: Students will be able to use methods for sensor fusion to inform robot perception., Students will be able to implement artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering along with neural networks, Bayesian algorithms, and information theory to identify robot states., Students will be able to analyze benchmark problems such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2112, MATH 2940, and MATH 4710 (or ENGRD 2700 or ENGRD 2720), or graduate standing in a technical field.

class: ECE 5250
class title: Digital Signal Processing and Statistical Inference
description: This course introduces discrete-time signal and system models in deterministic and stochastic settings and develops signal processing and statistical inference methodologies for real-time sensing and control applications.  The course is intended for upper-level undergraduate and beginning graduate engineering students in engineering departments.
outcome: Be able to obtain impulse response from frequency and state-space models and vice versa.  Be able to analyze system stability, reachability, and observability given a linear time-invariant state space model., Be able to design and implement state and observer-based feedback systems that stabilize an unstable system., Be able to understand stationary and wide-sense stationary models of discrete-time signal and the notion of power spectrum density of a wide-sense stationary process., Be able to solve signal estimation and detection problems under parametric and state-space models, including implementing Wiener and Kalman filtering techniques for estimation, and using matched filtering in signal detection., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and MATH 2940, ECE 3100 or equivalent course that satisfies ECE probability requirements, ECE 2720 and ECE 3250 or equivalent courses.

class: ECE 5280
class title: Optimal System Analysis and Design
description: Introduction to optimization theory and algorithms for system analysis and design. Topics include linear programming, convex programming, duality. We may touch dynamic programming around the end if time permits. Application will be discussed in various areas including geometric problems, networks, control, circuits, signal processing, and communications. This course is ideal for students who have not had an optimization course but want to have an idea of the subject within one semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3250, MATH 1920, MATH 2940. 

class: ECE 5320
class title: Integrated Micro Sensors and Actuators: Bridging the Physical and Digital Worlds
description: Introduction to micro and nano devices that allow the digital world to both sense and actuate in the physical world. Design and analysis of modern MEMS/NEMS (Micro/Nano Electromechanical Systems) touch, accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure, microphones, neural probe sensors. Design and analysis of electrostatic, piezoelectric, thermal, and magnetic actuators for frequency control and micro robotic applications. This is an interdisciplinary course drawing from mechanics, materials, solid state devices, CMOS electronics, and micro and nano fabrication. The students design, fabricate, and test a microsensor chip to implement class concepts.
outcome: Be able to design and model a digital app-based electronic interface to integrated sensors., Be able to model spring-mass equivalent models of micro/nano fabricated structures, using analysis and finite-element analysis software., Be able to use individual fabrication steps into a device fabrication process flow., Be able to design and model electromechanical models of planar surface micromachined accelerometers and gyroscopes., Be able to design membrane based sensors and actuators such as pressure monitors and microphones., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2100 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 5330
class title: Quantum Physics and Engineering
description: Introduction to quantum physics and engineering for advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate students. Topics covered include historical developments, quantum postulates, Schrodinger equation, quantum states and observables, measurement in quantum mechanics, quantum confined states in potential wells and atoms, quantum tunneling, uncertainty relations, Dirac notation, angular momentum and spin, quantum dynamics, time-independent and time-dependent perturbation theories, quantum two-level systems, quantum information and the qubit, quantum computation and quantum circuits, identical particles, quantum statistics for fermions and bosons, fundamentals of quantum statistical physics, quantization of light and the photon, quantization of simple mechanical and electrical superconducting circuits. The course will enable students to take advanced courses in areas related to electronic and optical devices, solid state physics and material science, and quantum information and computation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2214, MATH 2930, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 5360
class title: Semiconductor Electronic and Photonics Devices
description: The class develops the fundamentals of semiconductor electronic and photonic devices that power to-day's computation, communication, and memory industries. It relates the basics of pn junctions to their applications in solar cells, light emitting diodes, and lasers. Majority and minority carrier transport in heterostructure bipolar transistors is related to gain and speed limits of amplifiers for 5G communications and beyond. Schottky diodes and their applications in power electronics, and in field effect transistors of many flavors ranging from Silicon CMOS and FinFETs to GaN high electron mobility transistors are covered. Tunneling transport, flash memory, and DRAM devices are discussed. The course uses industrially relevant simulation tools, and the laboratory component gives students firsthand experience of measuring and appreciating the power and the limitations of semiconductor devices, and the reason for their revolutionary influence on our lives and society. MEng students and ECE PhD students who enroll in the 5000 level will be required to complete one extra design laboratory project compared to the 4000 level class.
outcome: Obtain a well-grounded understanding of semiconductor device operation and advanced ideas in use in microelectronic industry and future generations of electronic circuitry., Learn through simulations, the aspects of physical behavior that analytic solutions are incomplete at and their more complete description of operational physics., Apply device fundamentals and simulation techniques to design modern nanoscale device structures., Develop comprehensive skills straddling electronics, integration, and devices as used in integrated circuits leading to effective communication of results., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150 or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 5414
class title: Applied Machine Learning
description: Learn and apply key concepts of modeling, analysis and validation from machine learning, data mining and signal processing to analyze and extract meaning from data. Implement algorithms and perform experiments on images, text, audio and mobile sensor measurements. Gain working knowledge of supervised and unsupervised techniques including classification, regression, clustering, feature selection, and dimensionality reduction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800 or the equivalent plus basic familiarity with Matlab or Python, or permission of the instructor.

class: ECE 5415
class title: Applied Digital Signal Processing and Communications
description: This course teaches some fundamentals of digital signal processing (DSP) and communication using a balanced mix between math and hands-on experiments. The course will start by teaching basic concepts in signals and systems. We will then cover topics in time-frequency analysis, sampling, filters, audio signal communication, quantization, source coding, and compressed sensing. We will use multiple hands-on programming assignments to demonstrate the concepts we cover in class and problem sets that will help students practice with the theory. A background in linear algebra and probability will be critical to follow the theoretical aspects. All coding will be done in Python.

class: ECE 5470
class title: Computer Vision
description: Covers computer acquisition and analysis of image data with emphasis on techniques for robot vision. Concentrates on descriptions of objects at three levels of abstraction: segmented images (images organized into subimages that are likely to correspond to interesting objects), geometric structures (quantitative models of image and world structures), and relational structures (complex symbolic descriptions of images and world structures). The programming of several computer-vision algorithms is required.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2720 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 5510
class title: Electric Power Systems I
description: Acquaints students with modern electric power system modeling, analysis and computation. Stresses analysis techniques appropriate for power system modeling, analysis and power flow computation. Topics include transmission line models, transformers and per unit system, generator models, network matrices, power flow analysis and computation, real and reactive power control, voltage control, economic dispatch.
outcome: Knowledge of a variety of mathematical models for power system components., Ability to classify such models as to issues of static model and dynamic model., Ability to make optimal inferences with respect to such criteria as minimum production cost and minimum emission (power flow and economic dispatch). Elements of optimal design are introduced., Response of power flow, bus voltage to power demand variations as well as power injection variations., Response of power system static behaviors to power system contingencies (such as line outages, transformer outages, generator tripping and huge load variations)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3250.

class: ECE 5530
class title: Analog Integrated Circuit Design
description: Overview of devices available to analog integrated-circuit designers in modern CMOS and BiCMOS processes: resistors, capacitors, MOS transistors, and bipolar transistors. Basic building blocks for linear analog integrated circuits: single-stage amplifiers, current mirrors, and differential pairs. Transistor-level design of linear analog integrated circuits, such as operational amplifiers and operational transconductance amplifiers. Layout techniques for analog integrated circuits. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on design-oriented analysis techniques.
outcome: Develop an understanding of device and circuit theory sufficient to estimate the low and high frequency behavior of linear circuits, including noise., Develop an intuition for analog circuit behavior in both linear and nonlinear operation., Be able to calculate transfer functions and Bode plots and use them to estimate the stability of an electronic system., Develop an ability to parse large circuits and systems into smaller, analyzable subunits, analyze them, and then apply the understanding gained from that process to analyze the system as a whole, including for noise and variation., Implement a circuit or subsystem at the transistor level to solve an open-ended problem and effectively communicate the constraints and critical aspects of that system., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150.

class: ECE 5560
class title: Power Electronics
description: Power electronics is an enabling technology for sustainable and energy efficient systems, as all renewable energy sources (including solar and wind) and efficient electrical loads (including LED lighting and electric vehicles) require a power electronic converter to interface them with the electrical grid. Power electronic converters, being inherently non-linear/time-variant circuits, cannot be analyzed using linear time-invariant (LTI) circuit analysis techniques, nor conventional small-signal linearization techniques taught in introductory circuits (ECE 2100) and microelectronics (ECE 3150) courses. This course, which will follow ECE 3150, will introduce advanced circuit analysis and modeling techniques required to predict the steady-state and dynamic behavior of power electronic converters. The course will also introduce seniors and first-year graduate students to other advanced topics which are required for the analysis and design of power converters, including power semiconductor device modeling, thermal modeling, magnetic component modeling, electromagnetic interference (EMI) filter design, and switching converter control design, at a level appropriate for them. This course will equip ECE students with the theoretical and practical skills needed to innovate in the area of power electronics, and allow them to succeed in graduate school and in the rapidly growing job market for power electronic engineers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150 or permission of instructor required.

class: ECE 5570
class title: Microwave Circuit Design
description: This course covers techniques to design and analyze microwave circuits. These techniques, in general, can be used for electrical devices with dimensions in the order of the operating wavelength. These devices are commonly used in RF/mm- wave wireless communication systems, quantum computing/sensing systems, and electromagnetic imaging/radar systems. Topics include planar transmission lines, network analysis, S-parameters, matching networks, resonators, power dividers/combiners, filters, and non-reciprocal devices. The course emphasizes physical understanding, intuitive design methods, and hands-on experience in using E+M simulation tools and microwave measurements.
outcome: Analyze important building blocks in microwave/millimeter wave systems., Design and optimize microwave components and understand the challenges in high operating frequency., Develop the ability to use E+M circuit simulators and perform microwave measurements., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3030 and ECE 3150.

class: ECE 5620
class title: Fundamentals of Data Compression
description: Fundamental limits and practical algorithms for data compression. Entropy and other information measures. Variable and ﬁxed-length lossless and lossy source codes. Universal compression. Single-source and network conﬁgurations. Applications to text and multimedia compression.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 4110 or equivalent.

class: ECE 5660
class title: Computer Networks and Telecommunications
description: This is a senior-level course in information networking with an emphasis on wireless technology. Examples of topics include: 5G cellular, the latest WiFi standards, Bluetooth, routing and switching, congestion control, network security, and user privacy. Though the focus will be on communication networking technologies, downstream legal and social issues that arise from design decisions will be discussed. Added midterm, longer final report, more advanced homework.
outcome: Knowledge and understanding of how modern cellular technology, the Internet and other prominent technologies reached their current form., Ability to understand and analyze basic important algorithms in the Internet, such as congestion control and shortest path routing., Be able to understand the challenges that come with designing wireless networks and the tradeoff of corresponding solutions., Understand the limitation of current wired and wireless architectures. Be able to perform related analysis and design, and to predict future emphases as these technologies evolve., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3100.

class: ECE 5725
class title: Design with Embedded Operating Systems
description: Design of microcontroller based systems using embedded Linux. Student teams design and debug example solutions on a target microcontroller (for example, Raspberry Pi) during lab sessions. Emphasis will be on application and Linux programming skills, processor and microcontroller architecture with some discussion of hardware interfaces. Students create a final, end-of-semester project using the microcontroller platform and development techniques discussed during the semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3140/CS 3420.

class: ECE 5740
class title: Computer Architecture
description: This course aims to provide a strong foundation for students to understand modern computer system architecture and to apply these insights and principles to future computer designs. The course is structured around the three primary building blocks of general-purpose computing systems: processors, memories, and networks. The first half of the course focuses on the fundamentals of each building block. Topics include processor microcoding and pipelining; cache microarchitecture and optimization; and network topology, routing, and flow control. The second half of the course delves into more advanced techniques and will enable students to understand how these three building blocks can be integrated to build a modern shared-memory multicore system. Topics include superscalar execution, branch prediction, out-of-order execution, register renaming and memory disambiguation; VLIW, vector, and multithreaded processors; memory protection, translation, and virtualization; and memory synchronization, consistency, and coherence. This course includes a significant project decomposed into five lab assignments. Throughout the semester, students will gradually design, implement, test, and evaluate a complete multicore system capable of running real parallel applications at the register-transfer level.
outcome: Describe computer architecture concepts and mechanisms related to the design of modern processors, memories, and networks and explain how these concepts and mechanisms interact., Apply this understanding to new computer architecture design problems within the context of balancing application requirements against technology constraints; more specifically, quantitatively assess a design's execution time in cycles and qualitatively assess a design's cycle time, area, and energy., Evaluate various design alternatives and make a compelling quantitative and/or qualitative argument for why one design is superior to the other approaches., Demonstrate the ability to implement and verify designs of varying complexity at the register-transfer-levels., Create new designs at the register-transfer-level and the associated effective testing strategies., Write concise yet comprehensive technical reports that describe designs implemented at the register-transfer-levels, explain the testing strategy used to verify functionality, and evaluate the designs to determine the superior approach., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3140/CS 3420 or CS 3410. Students should feel comfortable working with a hardware description language such as Verilog, SystemVerilog, or VHDL.

class: ECE 5746
class title: Applied Digital ASIC Design
description: This course provides a hands-on experience in digital very-large scale integration (VLSI) design using state-of-the-art computer aided design (CAD) tools. The students will learn how to implement an algorithm of their choice (written in Python or MATLAB) as an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) using hardware description language on register transfer level. The course does not require any prerequisites as the students will be guided through the entire design flow and learn the necessary skills while working on their ASIC designs. At the end of the semester, the students will send their ASIC designs in a 500nm or 180nm CMOS process to fabrication through the MOSIS Educational Program. In a follow-up lab course (1 credit), the fabricated ASIC will be tested and, if applicable, integrated into a larger system.

class: ECE 5755
class title: Modern Computer Systems and Architecture
description: This Master's level course is designed to provide a hardware-centric overview of computer systems used in modern computing platforms. From the bottom up we will study the architecture of processor architectures (e.g., pipelined CPUs, ISA, RISC vs. CISC, out-of-order execution) and memory systems (e.g., memory hierarchy, caching, DRAM memories). We will understand how to evaluate the performance of modern processors and exploit parallelism in applications. This includes parallelization across multi-core CPUs, GPUs, and specialized hardware. Through ands-on assignments and an open-ended project students will develop a holistic understanding of modern computer systems and how they are designed.
outcome: Demonstrate an understanding of micro-architectural principles foundational computer architectures including processor pipelines, caching and memory systems, multi-core designs., Demonstrate an understanding of modern computer systems such as software parallelization strategies (e.g., ILP, TLP, DLP), hardware accelerators (e.g., GPUs, FPGAs, ASICs), and modern mobile and datacenter scale systems., Demonstrate the ability to analyze performance bottlenecks of software applications running on hardware platforms and optimize systems to maximize performance and efficiency., 

class: ECE 5830
class title: Introduction to Technical Management
description: This course is taught from the perspective of a chief technology officer and is targeted at M. Eng. and management students interested in "real world" problems. It provides an introduction via case examples to the technical, management, and organizational issues of developing and marketing products in high-tech businesses. The focus is on the unique nature of this type of business, including managing with high risk/uncertainty levels, learning to manage very diverse project teams, and recognizing technical versus market success in order to make good business decisions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: industrial experience or equivalent (summer work or schoolwork).

class: ECE 5870
class title: Energy Seminar I
description: Energy Seminars will explore energy-related topics of emerging, contemporary and historical interest. An abbreviated list of subjects explored in the seminars includes: global energy resources, energy generation technologies (present and future), energy storage options, environmental impacts and climate change mitigation, energy policy, and energy delivery economics and systems. Seminar speakers will be distinguished practicing engineers and executives from industry and government as well as faculty members from several departments at Cornell, and other academic institutions. Students from any department in Engineering or the Physical Sciences should find these talks informative.

class: ECE 5970
class title: Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering
description: Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.

class: ECE 5995
class title: Master of Engineering Design Project I
description: Two-semester Design Project: must enroll in both semesters; students will receive a letter grade for each individual semester. For students enrolled in M.Eng. (Electrical and Computer Engineering) degree program. Uses real engineering situations to present fundamentals of engineering design. Each professor is assigned a section for the fall and spring. Students who do not complete the Design Project in the spring receive a grade only for the work completed up to the point of the required submission date, which is the last day of Finals Week. Students must then enroll for the summer with the ECE M.Eng. director to complete the work remaining for the design project.

class: ECE 5997
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent study supervised by a faculty member in Electrical and Computer Engineering. A final report or exam is required. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor.

class: ECE 5998
class title: Directed Research
description: Research directed by a faculty member in Electrical and Computer Engineering. A final report or exam is required. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor.

class: ECE 5999
class title: MEng Technical Internship
description: This course offers M.Eng. students the opportunity to receive credit for ECE relevant work occurring as part of a summer (or semester) internship. Normally taken in the semester following the internship, students in the course will be required to write a detailed report describing the ECE related technical work performed during internship.

class: ECE 6210
class title: Theory of Linear Systems
description: State-space and multi-input-multi-output linear systems in discrete and continuous time. The state transition matrix, the matrix exponential, and the Cayley-Hamilton theorem. Controllability, observability, stability, realization theory. At the level of Linear Systems by Kailath.
outcome: Students will have an ability to develop state space models of dynamic linear systems in continuous time and discrete time based on physics models, input/output models, or rudimentary input/output experimental data., An ability to determine whether a system is controllable or observable., An ability to design stable state observers using pole placement., An ability to design stable full-state feedback controllers and observer-based controllers using pole placement., An ability to analyze system stability using pole locations and using the Lyapunov equation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 3260 or ECE 3250, or permission of instructor.

class: ECE 6320
class title: Applied Magnetism
description: Fundamentals of magnetism, magnetic materials, and their applications. Topics include: sources of magnetism, types of magnetism, theory of electronic magnetism, magnetic anisotropy energies, domain theory, magnetic resonance, magnetostriction and magnetoelasticity, spin torques, thin-film phenomena, spin caloritronics, and permanent magnets. Current device and industry applications relevant to each topic will be discussed.
outcome: Develop an ability to understand magnetic phenomena and predict magnetic behavior based on the competing anisotropy energies involved., Develop an ability to design magnetic and spintronic devices to meet the desired needs of industry and research., Develop an ability to interpret magnetic behavior based on knowledge of material properties and magnetic anisotropy energies., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3030 or AEP 3550 - AEP 3560 sequence or equivalent.

class: ECE 6680
class title: Bio-inspired Coordination of Multi-Agent Systems
description: Autonomous multi-agent systems are becoming an integral part of our daily lives with thousands of robots and drones operating in places from warehouses to entertainment lightshows. With robot costs dropping to mainstream consumer levels, the current technological wave is driven by industry, researchers, and ambitious hobbyists, and spans applications in autonomous vehicles, construction, agriculture, and more. With this eminent technological revolution, it is critical that we look beyond robots working efficiently in parallel, and towards actual swarm intelligence for superior system ability and robustness beyond the sum of its parts. As a proof of concept, natural swarms exhibit efficient, error tolerant, and adaptive properties far beyond the individual scope. Beyond serving as an introduction to research, reading and review of scientific papers, this course also offers insights into both biology and the systems they have inspired.

class: ECE 6750
class title: Advanced Computer Architecture
description: This course discusses advanced topics in computer architecture beyond the material that is covered in undergraduate courses such as ECE 4750/CS 4420. In particular, the course places special focus on multicore and multiprocessor architectures (coherence, consistency, synchronization, interconnects, OS support, etc.), as well as advanced architecture techniques (simultaneous multithreading, speculative loads and stores, neural branch predictors, hardware resource management, memory scheduling, etc.) Students work on parallel programming assignments that emphasize hardware-aware performance optimization.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 4750 or CS 4420.

class: ECE 6775
class title: High-Level Digital Design Automation
description: The course starts with an introduction to modern electronic system design automation flow, before delving into high-level synthesis (HLS) design methodologies and tools for enabling digital system design above the register transfer level. Specific topics include C-based HLS design methods, hardware specialization, scheduling, pipelining, resource sharing, reconfigurable computing, and hardware/software co-design. This course also discusses the applications of a number of important optimization techniques, such as graph algorithms, dynamic programming, local search, and linear programming. In addition, commercial C-to- FPGA tools will be provided to the students to implement real-life image/video processing and machine learning applications on programmable system-on- chips that tightly integrate a dual-core processor and FPGAs.

class: ECE 6950
class title: Graduate Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering
description: Special topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering for ECE graduate students.

class: ECE 6960
class title: Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering
description: Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.

class: ECE 6970
class title: Graduate Topics in ECE
description: Seminar, special interest, or temporary course.

class: ECE 7230
class title: Bayesian Estimation and Stochastic Optimization
description: Covers essential topics in high dimensional statistical inference, stochastic optimization, Bayesian statistical signal processing and Markov Chain Monte-Carlo stochastic simulation. The course is four inter-related parts. Part 1 covers the basics of probabilistic models, Markov chain Monte-Carlo simulation and regression with sparsity constraints. Part 2 covers Bayesian filtering including the Kalman filter, Hidden Markov Model filter and sequential Markov chain Monte-Carlo methods such as the particle filter. Part 3 covers maximum likelihood estimation and numerical methods such as the Expectation Maximization algorithm. Part 4 covers stochastic gradient algorithms and stochastic optimization. The course focuses on the deep fundamental ideas that underpin signal processing, data science and machine learning. The discussion sections will focus on more advanced aspects in statistical inference.
outcome: Students will learn state of the art methods in Bayesian state estimation, parameter estimation and applications., 

class: ECE 7235
class title: Sustainable Urban and Energy Delivery Systems
description: The course focuses on how to transition from legacy energy delivery infrastructures dependent on fossil fuel to a sustainable decarbonized grid that harnesses distributed renewable energy resources and responsive demand from buildings, electrified transportation systems, and industrial loads. The content includes models and abstractions for the architecture of the cyber-physical energy system, its economics, and future evolution, and numerical optimization and learning methods in support of the infrastructure's safety critical operations in the legacy system and in the future architecture. At the MSc level the students will focus on learning how to use tools and data while at the graduate level the students will be asked to also solve problems, formulate novel solutions, interpret results. Similarly, to differentiate the MSc from PhD level and course outcomes, the final project will require the MSc students to pick one out of a set of predefined problems while the PhD students will have to define an original problem and solution.
outcome: Students will be able to identify technical and operational models for energy delivery systems and appreciate why energy consumption in urban environments is bound to continue to be the most significant source of emissions under the status quo., Students will learn about and analyze emerging technological solutions in wide area sensing and IoT networks, machine learning and decision models that support the coordination the distributed renewable resources on the supply side with the flexible demand of electricity in urban environments., Students will identify security challenges that are unique of cyber-physical infrastructures and need to be addressed to advance to rip the benefits of digital technology in the field., Through assignments and projects, the students will gain hands-on experience in demonstrating on how to apply novel data models, network technology and software tools that encompass the various topics covered in the class., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: coursework in ML, data science, law and policy or ethics, calculus and algebra, algorithms, and python programming. Recommended prerequisite: coursework in theory and optimization.

class: ECE 7620
class title: Fundamentals of Data Compression
description: Fundamental limits and practical algorithms for data compression. Entropy and other information measures. Variable and fixed-length lossless and lossy source codes. Universal compression. Single-source and network configurations. Applications to text, multimedia compression, and machine learning. This course is intended for Ph.D. students. M.Eng. students should enroll in ECE 5620.
outcome: Demonstrate use of information measures including entropy, mutual information, relatively entropy, and their properties., Compute theoretical limits to compression for both lossless and lossy problems., Analyze the performance of lossless and lossy compression schemes, including comparing their performance against the theoretical limits., Design lossless and lossy compression algorithms for provided datasets that approach the theoretical limits., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 4110 and basic Python programming skills.

class: ECE 7910
class title: Thesis Research
description: For students enrolled in master's or doctoral program. Each professor is assigned a section number. To register, see roster for appropriate six-digit course ID numbers.

class: ECON 1001
class title: Principles of Micro-Economics Supplement
description: Reviews lecture material presented in ECON 1110 lectures; provides problem-solving techniques, study tips, and additional problems to prepare for exams and problem sets; provides additional time for questions and discussion of concepts. Provides additional instruction for students who need reinforcement.

class: ECON 1002
class title: Principles of Macro-Economics Supplement
description: Reviews lecture material presented in ECON 1120 lectures; provides problem-solving techniques, study tips, and additional problems to prepare for exams and problem sets; provides additional time for questions and discussion of concepts. Provides additional instruction for students who need reinforcement.

class: ECON 1110
class title: Introductory Microeconomics
description: Explanation and evaluation of how the price system operates in determining what goods are produced, how goods are produced, who receives income, and how the price system is modified and influenced by private organizations and government policy.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ECON 1120
class title: Introductory Macroeconomics
description: Analysis of aggregate economic activity in relation to the level, stability, and growth of national income. Topics may include the determination and effects of unemployment, inflation, balance of payments, deficits, and economic development, and how these may be influenced by monetary, fiscal, and other policies.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ECON 2040
class title: Networks
description: This interdisciplinary course examines network structures and how they matter in everyday life. The course examines how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects each of these worlds. Tools of graph theory and game theory are taught and then used to analyze networks. Topics covered include the web, the small world phenomenon, markets, neural networks, contagion, search and the evolution of networks.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ECON 2100
class title: Teaching and Learning Economics
description: This course teaches students what they need to know in order to be excellent course assistants (CA's) in economics courses at Cornell. We will meet for an hour each week to talk about how students learn economics, and how best to help them learn. Students in this course will get concrete guidance on what to do as a CA, and we'll discuss the research behind this guidance. Students will be expected to do some reading outside class and either write a research paper on economic education or develop new teaching materials that can be incorporated into an economics course. Students will also facilitate small group activities in lecture courses (3 hours per week) and help other students in the Economics Support Center (2 hours per week).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: ECON 3030
class title: Intermediate Microeconomic Theory
description: The pricing processes in a private enterprise economy are analyzed under varying competitive conditions, and their role in the allocation of resources and the functional distribution of national income is considered.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, ECON 1120 and calculus.

class: ECON 3040
class title: Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory
description: Introduces the theory of national income and determination and economic growth in alternative models of the national economy. Examines the interaction and relation of these models to empirical aggregate economic data. Reviews national accounts, output and employment determination, price stability and economic growth, in the context of alternative government policy programs and the impact of globalization.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, ECON 1120 and calculus.

class: ECON 3110
class title: Probability Models and Inference for the Social Sciences
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or equivalent.

class: ECON 3120
class title: Applied Econometrics
description: Introduction to the theory and application of econometric techniques. Emphasis is on both development of techniques and applications of econometrics to economic questions. Topics include estimation and inference in bivariate and multiple regression models, instrumental variables, regression with qualitative information, heteroskedasticity, and serial correlation. Students are expected to apply techniques through regular empirical exercises with economic data.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3110 or ECON 3130.

class: ECON 3130
class title: Statistics and Probability
description: Provides an introduction to statistical inference and to principles of probability. It includes descriptive statistics, principles of probability, discrete and continuous distributions, and hypothesis testing (of sample means, proportions, variance). Regression analysis and correlation are introduced.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 - MATH 1120 and ECON 1110 or ECON 1120.

class: ECON 3171
class title: Causal Reasoning and Policy Evaluation I
description: This course covers methods used by social scientists to identify causal relationships in data, with a focus on evaluating the effects of real-world policies. Many social science analyses--including in the economics fields of public, labor, health, and development-aim to answer these types of policy-related causal questions: What is the effect of having health insurance on someone's health? Does the death penalty reduce crime? Will lowering class sizes increase students' academic achievement? The goal of this course is to train you to become both a high-quality consumer and producer of this type of research. You will learn about several research designs and data analysis methods for identifying causal relationships in data, read and assess empirical papers that apply these methods, and apply these methods to datasets yourself.
outcome: Assess the strengths and limitations of different research designs for estimating causal effects., Read and assess the strengths and weaknesses of empirical research answering causal questions., Apply the research designs covered in the course to data-based examples., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 3100 or equivalent.

class: ECON 3250
class title: Economics of the U.S. Social Safety Net
description: This course provides an overview of the major programs that make up the social safety net in the United States. We will review the economic rationale behind social programs, identify the economic consequences of these programs, and assess the empirical research on these topics. A major emphasis of the course will be on understanding the strengths and limitations of the core methodologies used in the existing economics literature.
outcome: Identify and explain the reasons for government redistribution and provision of social insurance., Describe the ways in which social programs are implemented in reality, and analyze the potential distortions and consequences of program design using economic reasoning., Evaluate the empirical evidence on the impact of social programs on individual behavior and well-being by applying knowledge of statistical methodology., Formulate and express well-reasoned arguments for or against specific policies through written and oral presentations., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ECON 3465
class title: Bridging the Divide: Labor Market Reforms and Place-Based Policies
description: Should policy interventions target inequality between workers or disparities between places? Inequality has risen in most developed countries in recent decades. While top incomes have grown significantly, incomes at the bottom of the distribution have increased much less. In light of these trends, this course examines the role of labor market and place-based policies in reducing inequality, and discusses the trade-offs that arise between reducing inequality and promoting economic activity.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, ECON 1120, and ILRLE 2400 or equivalent.

class: ECON 3486
class title: Field Experiments in Economics and Business
description: Field experiments are ubiquitous in both academic economics and the corporate world. They are highly effective tools for both researchers and business leaders to assess the effectiveness of different interventions and are used to test theories, inform policy and enhance business strategies. Modern digital tools have made it increasingly easy to conduct field experiments and collect high-quality data on a large scale. This course will cover the foundational methods of designing and analyzing field experiments, and discuss seminal field experimental work in economics and business. As part of this course, students will conduct their own online field experiment.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRLE 2400 or ECON 1110 &amp; ECON 1120.

class: ECON 3545
class title: Money and Finance in the Digital Age
description: This course will provide an overview of new financial technologies (Fintech), cryptocurrencies, central bank digital currencies, and decentralized finance (DeFi). The implications of these novel technologies for the future of financial markets, central banking, and international finance will be examined. The course will also cover basic analytical models in open economy macroeconomics and international finance, focusing on capital flows and exchange rate dynamics.
outcome: Demonstrate ability to formulate a research topic, conduct independent quantitative research, and write a substantive research paper., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3040 and ECON 3120 or ECON 3140 or equivalents.

class: ECON 3610
class title: The Economics of Consumer Policy
description: Familiarizes students with the economic analysis of consumer policy issues. Uses the tools of microeconomic analysis to investigate the interaction between government and the marketplace, with an emphasis on how that interaction affects consumers. Examines the rationale for and effects of regulation of industry. Considers alternative theories of regulation, including the capture, economic, and public interest theories. Applies those theories to specific types of regulation, including economic regulation of specific industries (e.g., telecommunications, electricity, trucking, railroads, postal services) as well as to broader social regulation (e.g., health, safety, environmental). The effects of regulatory reform in numerous industries are also examined. An attempt is made to examine current topics relating to consumer policy.
outcome: Describe specific consumer protection regulations in place in a variety of markets; compare policies across markets and across government jurisdictions., Use concepts from information economics and behavioral economics to explain the rationale for specific types of consumer protection regulations., Analyze the predicted efficiency and distributional consequences of consumer protection regulations, using the tools of microeconomics., Use empirical evidence to critically analyze the performance of regulations., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 3720
class title: The Economics of Health Care Markets
description: Health care systems and health policy are undergoing rapid change as medical technology advances and costs rise. Debates concerning the delivery, regulation and financing of health care have intensified. This course uses basic economic tools to analyze central questions in health care today, as well as fundamental issues in health policy: For example, what is the current role of the government in the health sector, and what should it be? What is the social insurance role of the government, and how is it played out in policies that impact the health of the population? How is health insurance structured, and what are the implications of having employers be the providers of private health insurance? This course is about applying economic tools of policy analysis to gain insight into the workings of the health care system and to analyze current issues in health policy. It is mainly a U.S. institutions-based course, with some international comparisons. It should be of interest to students preparing for all kinds of careers in health care, and to others with an interest in important public policy issues.
outcome: Students will gain foundational knowledge for demand-side and supply-side topics tied to health and medical care., Students will be introduced to the common, contemporary methods for causal inference research design., Students will learn to identify and address specific challenges embedded within empirical analyses based on causal inference research design., Students will understand and appreciate nuanced arguments that favor or oppose specific empirical techniques or analytic interpretations in key contexts., Students will apply the newly acquired knowledge and skills by critically evaluating the relevant scientific literature., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000, PUBPOL 3100, or equivalent.

class: ECON 3760
class title: Economics of Education
description: The economics of education is about understanding how and why people make decisions to invest in education, the effect of education on long-term social and economic outcomes, the behavior of those institutions that "produce" education, and how best to design and implement public policies affecting the level and distribution of education resources. The basic tools of economics provide a framework to evaluate education policies including K-12 school finance, student financial aid, and college admissions. Throughout the course, there will be an emphasis on examining empirical tests of the economic theory and measuring the effects of policy initiatives on educational outcomes. 
outcome: Apply the tools of economic analysis to assess core education policies., Differentiate between human capital and signaling models., Interpret empirical results from research papers as they relate to policy., Describe endogeneity issues in empirical research papers., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000, PUBPOL 3100.

class: ECON 3801
class title: Introduction to Game Theory and Strategic Thinking
description: Some knowledge of game-theory is essential in today's age of complex decision-making, diplomacy, and corporate strategizing. This course is an introduction to the basic principles of game theory and rational choice. The course is designed for students with an interest in economics, political strategy, moral philosophy, and algorithmic reasoning. Important ideas and concepts, with real-life illustrations, will be discussed. Over the semester students will learn the essential ideas of Nash, Schelling and others, different conceptualizations of equilibrium, such as the Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection, and how they apply to different contexts, such as competition among firms, war, and diplomacy. The course will help us understand everyday phenomena, such as addiction, procrastination and moral dilemmas, and show how reasoning can be a critical input for personal happiness. Students will be introduced to some unresolved paradoxes of rational behavior and encouraged to try to solve them on their own.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS)  (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: ECON 3805
class title: Competition Law and Policy
description: This course will examine issues that arise when a country attempts to implement and maintain a "competition policy" as a way of promoting economic growth and efficiency. The basic reading material will start with actual cases (most of them arising under U.S. antitrust law), and use those cases to probe the legal, economic and broad policy issues that the cases raise.
outcome: This course examines, through the lens of economic analysis, legal principles drawn from various branches of law, including contracts, torts, and property. Cases are assigned for class discussion; in addition, there are exams and writing assignments. By the end of the course, students should be able to use basic economic analysis to better understand how the law does and should decide cases in various branches of law., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or its equivalent.

class: ECON 3910
class title: Health, Poverty, and Inequality: A Global Perspective
description: Course focuses on global health challenges, and how they are related to poverty and inequality.
outcome: Understand the nature and extent of global health challenges and inequalities in health at various levels, including across countries, at the national level, and even within the household, both current and historical., Understand possible policy responses to improving health and well-being and reducing observed disparities, differentiating the appropriate role of government and the private sector in crafting solutions to global health programs, including priority setting and resource allocation., Prepare convincing and policy relevant documents that outline major global health challenges, including their causes, magnitude (prevalence and incidence), and feasible opportunities to address these problems, taking into account the political and economic dimensions, as well as considerations such as the time frame, and positive and negative externalities, both anticipated and unanticipated., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory microeconomics and statistics or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 4010
class title: Economics of Organizations
description: Why do most economic activities happen within managed organizations (i.e., firms) and not in markets (i.e., purchased from others)? More fundamentally, what is a firm? This course provides an introduction to *organizational economics* that seeks to understand the nature and workings of organizations—a collection of different people with dispersed information, responsibilities and non-aligned interests. You will learn about the theories of the boundaries of the firm that help unravel the neoclassical economics' "blackbox" view of the firm and the theories on the provision of incentives that ultimately shape firms. While the class takes a predominantly theoretical approach, you will also learn how the theories are in conversation with empirical evidence.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030 and either ECON 3130 or ECON 3110.

class: ECON 4140
class title: Methods and Computation in Program Evaluation
description: Introduces fundamental frameworks for program evaluation and causal inference in empirical research and the industry, and studies how modern predictive machine learning methods can be applied to get more credible estimates of causal effects. Problems are formulated and discussed in terms of formal econometric models, but the focus will be the applied and practical perspectives, especially in economics. Requires statistic and econometric knowledge at the level of ECON 3140 or equivalent, and programing experience in R or Python.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3140 or equivalent.

class: ECON 4290
class title: Economic Analysis of Politics
description: This is an advanced course intended for upper level economics undergraduates who enjoy learning about and analyzing economic models. The course provides an introduction to the economic analysis of politics. Part I discusses collective choice and introduces some core ideas from social choice theory. Part II provides an overview of economic theories of political behavior. Part III discusses how political decisions are distorted away from those that would be made by the benevolent governments from public economics textbooks. Part IV offers economic perspectives on a number of contemporary issues in American politics.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030, ECON 3040, and ECON 3110, or ECON 3130.

class: ECON 4410
class title: Quantitative Models for the Labor Market
description: In this course we will study two major features of modern economies. The first is the large dispersion across households in income and wealth, the second is the existence of persistent unemployment. We will be interested in understanding the models and tools that economists have developed to represent these phenomena, as well as in using these models to analyze the welfare implications of various government interventions. Topics to be covered include: Dynamic programming. Solution Methods of General Equilibrium models. Heterogeneous-agent macroeconomic models. Search, matching and equilibrium unemployment.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030, ECON 3140 or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 4545
class title: Advanced International Finance and Macroeconomics
description: This course introduces and develops the leading modern theories of economies open to trade in financial assets and real goods. The goal is to understand how cross-country linkages in influence macroeconomic developments within individual countries; how financial markets distribute risk and wealth around the world; and how trade changes the effectiveness of national monetary and fiscal policies. In exploring these questions, we emphasize the role that exchange rates and exchange rate policy take in shaping the consequences of international linkages. We apply our theories to current and recent events, including growing geoeconomic conflict between Eastern and Western countries, hyperinflation in Argentina, Brexit, and recent Euro-area debt crises.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite:  ECON 3040, either ECON 3110 or ECON 3130, and either ECON 3120 or ECON 3140.

class: ECON 4610
class title: Industrial Organization I
description: This course takes a game theoretic approach to the study of markets and market power. Topics include pricing, collusion, entry, product differentiation, advertising, and bargaining.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030 or equivalent.

class: ECON 4903
class title: Quantitative Analysis of Economic Data
description: The course will appeal to students who have strong quantitative skills and would like to see applications of economic theory to analyze issues prominent in major public debates. Currently, we offer a very limited number of advanced courses that require students to do independent research, discuss their ideas in teams, present their work, and write a research proposal.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3110 and ECON 3120, or equivalents.

class: ECON 4907
class title: The Economics of Asymmetric Information and Contracts
description: This course provides an introduction to the economics of asymmetric information, contracts and mechanism design. Topics covered include: bilateral contracting problems with moral hazard and/or adverse selection, bargaining with asymmetric information, the design of optimal auctions and other multilateral mechanisms, signaling and incomplete contacts. Prerequisites include intermediate microeconomics and statistics. The student is expected to be comfortable with basic probability (random variables, expectation, independence, and conditional probability) and calculus.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3030 and ECON 3130, or equivalents.

class: ECON 4998
class title: Cross-Cultural Work Experiences
description: This independent study course offers economics majors (i.e., undergraduates whose applications to affiliate with the economics major have been approved) an opportunity to reflect on concepts from economics as they were encountered and applied in a recent internship. Students write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of the economics major.

class: ECON 4999
class title: Independent Study in Economics
description: Independent study.

class: ECON 6090
class title: Microeconomic Theory I
description: Topics in consumer and producer theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least three years of undergraduate mathematics, including at least two semesters of formal mathematics such as analysis, and at least four semesters of economics beyond intermediate microeconomic and macroeconomic theory, or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 6130
class title: Macroeconomics I
description: Covers the following topics: static general equilibrium; intertemporal general equilibrium: infinitely lived agents models and overlapping generations models; welfare theorems; equivalence between sequential markets and Arrow-Debreu Markets; Ricardian proposition; Modigliani-Miller theorem; asset pricing; recursive competitive equilibrium; the Neoclassical Growth Model; calibration; and introduction to dynamic programming.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least three years of undergraduate mathematics, including at least two semesters of formal mathematics such as analysis, and at least four semesters of economics beyond intermediate microeconomic and macroeconomic theory, or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 6170
class title: Intermediate Mathematical Economics I
description: Covers selected topics in matrix algebra (vector spaces, matrices, simultaneous linear equations, characteristic value problem), calculus of several variables (elementary real analysis, partial differentiation) convex analysis (convex sets, concave functions, quasi-concave functions), classical optimization theory (unconstrained maximization, constrained maximization), Kuhn-Tucker optimization theory (concave programming, quasi-concave programming).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least three years of undergraduate mathematics, including at least two semesters of formal mathematics such as analysis, and at least four semesters of economics beyond intermediate microeconomic and macroeconomic theory, or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 6190
class title: Econometrics I
description: Gives the probabilistic and statistical background for meaningful application of econometric techniques. Topics include probability theory probability spaces, random variables, distributions, moments, transformations, conditional distributions, distribution theory and the multivariate normal distribution, convergence concepts, laws of large numbers, central limit theorems, Monte Carlo simulation; statistics: sample statistics, sufficiency, exponential families of distributions. Further topics in statistics are considered in ECON 6200.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least three years of undergraduate mathematics, including at least two semesters of formal mathematics such as analysis, and at least four semesters of economics beyond intermediate microeconomic and macroeconomic theory, or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 6590
class title: Empirical Strategies for Policy Analysis
description: Focuses on empirical strategies to identify the causal effects of public policies and programs. The course uses problem sets based on real-world examples and data to examine techniques for analyzing nonexperimental data including control function approaches, matching methods, panel-data methods, selection models, instrumental variables, and regression-discontinuity methods. The emphasis throughout, however, is on the critical role of research design in facilitating credible causal inference. The course aids students in both learning to implement a variety of statistical tools using large data sets, and in learning to select which tools are best suited to a given research project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: graduate course in econometrics (e.g., ILRLE 7490 or AEM 7100).

class: ECON 6910
class title: Foundations of the Social Sciences
description: Social science research almost always combines empirical observation (data), the construction of concepts (language), and the logical analysis of the relations between observations and concepts (statistics).  This course examines the relations between these three dimensions as the analyst moves from one to the other both as practice and in the crafting of a formal summary of findings and argument. We will be particularly interested in the foundational assumptions that underpin the connections between empirical reality, language, and statistical analysis. While these foundational assumptions are often taken for granted by social scientists, they vary dramatically between social science disciplines.  The implicit contradiction between that variance and their doxic acceptance within disciplines will be a primary focus of the course.

class: ECON 6990
class title: Readings in Economics
description: Independent study.

class: ECON 7150
class title: International Trade
description: This course is an advanced course in International Trade, targeted at second year PhD students. It covers theoretical models of international trade and economic geography, the gravity-type structure of trade through a variety of micro-foundations, and techniques to estimate trade models and assess counterfactuals. The course will also touch on global value chains, multinational productions, international diffusion of ideas, migration, and the consequences of trade for inequality.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: core economics graduate courses, or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 7245
class title: Topics in Econometrics and Machine Learning
description: This course discusses recent developments in Econometrics and Machine Learning. The topics covered will vary every year.

class: ECON 7335
class title: Introduction to Information Economics
description: Many economic decisions have to be made in settings in which many interacting agents have imperfect and diverse information about pay-off relevant variables. This course gives an overview of existing research in macroeconomics and finance that deviates from settings with perfectly informed rational agents. The course will cover both methodological and substantial aspects of the existing literature.

class: ECON 7420
class title: Seminar in Labor Economics I
description: Includes reading and discussion of selected topics in labor economics. Stresses applications of economic theory and econometrics to the labor market and human resource areas.

class: ECON 7510
class title: Industrial Organization and Regulation I
description: This course offers a graduate-level introduction to theoretical models in industrial organization. It is designed to prepare researchers to identify interesting questions and rigorously motivate empirical work. Topics include supermodular games, collusion, bargaining, auctions, industry dynamics, and productivity.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 6090, ECON 6100.

class: ECON 7660
class title: Microeconomics of International Development
description: This course introduces students to the key theories, canonical papers, and current frontiers in the microeconomics of international development. We cover topics related to agricultural household models, consumption smoothing, labor markets, trade and search, relational contracts, and public finance. Paired with AEM 7621 to form a graduate sequence in development economics.
outcome: Explain, use, and critically assess the findings of frontier research papers in the economics of developing countries., Understand and apply core models of consumer-producer households, consumption smoothing, labor markets, sectoral change, and domestic trade to problems of growth, poverty, and resource allocation in developing countries., Interpret and evaluate empirical research on the economic and social impacts of policies and programs., Formulate succinct, informed arguments on a specific research area of the student's choosing related to the economics of developing countries., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of first-year Ph.D. course sequence in AEM or ECON or permission of instructor.

class: ECON 7670
class title: Topics in International Finance
description: This course will provide a selective overview of topics at the cutting-edge of academic research and policy debates about the international monetary and financial system. Main areas will include the effects of financial globalization on growth, volatility, and the transmission of business cycles, as well as the determinants of capital flows and exchange rates. The course will cover topics at the intersection of international finance and macroeconomics, with particular emphasis on the implications for monetary policy and financial regulation. New research related to Fintech, cryptocurrencies, and central bank digital currencies will also be covered. This course is intended for advanced Ph.D. students, especially those in search of thesis topics, and will require extensive student involvement in preparing research proposals and critiques of existing literature. Students will develop their own research ideas during the course and are required to write a substantive research paper.
outcome: Discuss topics at the cutting-edge of academic research and policy debates about the international financial system., Identify key aspects of the literature on the effects of financial globalization, including growth, volatility, and the transmission of business cycles., Explain the causes and effects of the global financial crisis and what implications it has for the research agenda in international finance and macroeconomics., Review the latest literature on monetary policy and financial regulation, with an emphasis on these issues in the context of emerging market economies., Develop their own research ideas, building on material covered in the course, and start working on their Ph.D. or Master's theses or second-year papers., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Ph.D. level courses in macroeconomics and applied econometrics.

class: ECON 7740
class title: Law and Economics: A Game-Theoretic Approach
description: This course introduces graduate students to the main concepts and ideas of law and economics, founded on elementary game theory. These ideas are then applied to contemporary policy concerns, from promoting economic development and designing welfare interventions in developing countries, to controlling corruption and financial fraud. The defining feature of the course is the structuring of these topics within a common conceptual framework, and training students to develop these ideas further and apply them to new research questions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: ECON 7841
class title: Econometrics Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7842
class title: Microeconomic Theory Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7843
class title: Industrial Organization Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7845
class title: Workshop in Labor Economics
description: Research workshop featuring guests lecturers. Presentations of completed papers and work in progress by faculty members, advanced graduate students, and speakers from other universities. Focuses on the formulation, design, and execution of dissertations.

class: ECON 7846
class title: S.C. Tsiang Macroeconomics Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7847
class title: Development Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7848
class title: Public Economics Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7849
class title: Behavioral Economics Workshop
description: Research workshop featuring guest lecturers.

class: ECON 7850
class title: Third Year Research Seminar
description: Ph.D. students in the Field of Economics are required to take this year-long research seminar, and receive a grade of Satisfactory, in order to remain in good standing in the Ph.D. program. Students present and discuss each second-year paper, which must be completed before the semester opens and Economics 7850 meets for the first time. Students also present at least two additional papers or paper plans. These are intended to be part of the core of the student's thesis proposal, which must be given as part of the student's A Exam prior to the start of the fourth year of graduate study in the economics Ph.D. program. Economics 7851 ends with a mini-conference, attended by faculty and other Ph.D. students, in which each student makes a formal presentation in standard economics conference format, and each student discusses one of these presentations. Professional writing and presentation coaching is also provided.

class: ECON 7854
class title: Law, Economics and Policy Seminar
description: Research workshop for members of the economics graduate field; featuring guest speakers.

class: EDUC 2200
class title: Introduction to Adult Learning
description: Do adults learn differently than do youth? This experiential and community-engaged course is for anyone interested in planning and facilitating adult, community and lifelong learning. As inquirers ourselves, we not only study principles, theories and methods, we also put into practice what we learn. One of the ways we do this is by incorporating adult learning approaches within the seminar's design and educational practice (andragogy, rather than pedagogy). Another way we apply what we study is by mentoring adult learners. Each student serves as a learning partner to a Cornell employee who is pursuing an educational aim. A journey of mutual learning is a satisfying and meaningful adventure. As employees' partners, we are co-learners and co-educators, recognizing that each person has knowledge and experience to bring to the quest. 
outcome: Explore the relationship of leadership and learning in formal, nonformal, and informal education in personal and larger contexts., Develop deep consciousness of one's own core values for the purpose of mindfully engaging with diverse others in constructive and respectful ways., Learn and apply foundational principles and processes of instructional design and demonstrate these in planning and facilitating lessons with an adult Learning Partner across differences in generation, nationality, language, class, and ethnicity., Examine trends of educational inequity in this country and ramifications in the lives of adults of poor schooling as children., Through historic and contemporary cases, unpack narratives of popular education in community development, public engagement, and social justice through formal, nonformal, and informal venues., Recognize that being an educator involves not only understanding issues of power, inequity, and access, but also entails conscious ethical practice in everyday decision-making., 
distribution categories: (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: EDUC 2410
class title: The Art of Teaching
description: This exploratory course is designed for students of all backgrounds and interests who have a desire to learn more about education and teaching. Teaching takes place in a variety of contexts from the family to the workplace, and this course endeavors to examine the elements of teaching that transcend the typical school-teaching environment. Designed to guide students in reflecting upon their experiences to help them better understand the decisions they make as teachers. Students have the opportunity to pursue their own interests through a teaching fieldwork assignment. Possible field experiences range from large group to tutorial situations, from preschool to adult education, from traditional school subject matters to recreational and occupational areas, and from school-based to nonformal situations. The course work and readings are designed to build on these experiences throughout the semester and provide concepts and skills to apply in the field.
outcome: Analyze teaching situations using appropriate conceptual frameworks., Articulate and critically examine their beliefs and assumptions about teaching and schooling., Reflect on the elements involved in being an effective teacher in formal and informal educational situations., Discuss current educational issues as they relate to formal and informal educational settings., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: EDUC 2610
class title: Intergroup Dialogue
description: Intergroup dialogue is a form of communication specifically designed for people to engage with one another across social, cultural, and power differences in a critical and meaningful way. This class prepares students to live and work in a diverse world, and educates them in making choices that advance equity. Its main objectives are to: explore our human capacity and need to connect with ourselves and others; increase understanding of personal and social identities and how they inform our lives; explore the effects of social inequity at personal, interpersonal, and structural levels (including the ways in which it disrupts human connection); develop students' skills to communicate, work, and lead effectively across difference; and strengthen individual and collective capacities to strategize for change on campus and beyond.
outcome: Cultivate authentic and meaningful interpersonal connections across difference., Describe your own personal experience of multiple social identities., Articulate connections between individuals' experiences of social identity and societal systems of power, privilege, and oppression., Use dialogue practices in communicating with others., Meaningfully engage with a range of perspectives on issues related to societal systems of power, privilege, and oppression., Identify actions and opportunities for ameliorating inequities connected to social identity., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: EDUC 3110
class title: Educational Psychology
description: Educational psychology is the application of psychological principles and concepts to cases of teaching and learning. We study behavioral, cognitive, embodied, and social-cultural perspectives on learning and thinking, and we use them in planning and reflecting on weekly fieldwork outside the classroom. In the process, we become more mindful and skilled learners ourselves and better facilitators of others' learning.
outcome: Be able to analyze and improve instructional materials and methods in terms of their ... Appropriateness for a given learning goal Demands on memory Demands on attention Demands on their ability to process the language of instruction Assumptions about the level of intellectual abstraction that learners are capable of Potential to activate learner motivation, Be more efficient and effective at reading, summarizing, and asking critical questions about peer-reviewed original research in educational psychology, Be more comfortable and skilled at facilitating learning for another person (through questioning, listening, and observing learners at work), 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: EDUC 3350
class title: Youth Organizations and Leadership Development
description: Participants learn how to facilitate both youth and adult volunteer leadership development. They examine factors affecting membership, purposes, design, operation, and administration of youth organizations.
outcome: Demonstrate application of experiential learning models in education., Explain how youth organizations relate to secondary education and career exploration., Demonstrate knowledge and skills necessary for managing a 4-H/FFA chapter., Explain how the 4-H/FFA functions on the local, state, and national levels., Apply youth leadership theory to development of targeted youth organizations., Engage in the issues surrounding youth development in education & society., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: EDUC 4010
class title: Special Methods of Instruction in Agricultural Science Education
description: Students complete learning and skills development about special methods for teaching agricultural science education. Such learning and skill development may include metal fabrication, small engine physics, and/or special laboratory instruction related to agricultural sciences. Students reflect upon that learning and skill development and then create units of instruction employing special methods used to teach secondary and/or post-secondary students about agricultural knowledge, skills, and processes.
outcome: Develop proficiency and knowledge of technical aspects of teaching agriculture to include metal or wood fabrication, small engine maintenance and repair or hydraulics and electricity., Demonstrate safe and effective teaching strategies to deliver content in outcome #1 to the selected audience base., 

class: EDUC 4050
class title: Exploring Strategies for Teaching and Learning
description: EDUC 4050 builds off of the broad nature of EDUC 2410. This course incorporates extensive field work in teaching, lesson planning, and evaluation based upon current theories in instruction at the collegiate level. The course is intended to integrate theory and practice associated with learning and teaching in college classroom settings and includes a minimum of 40 hours of supervised fieldwork in specific college classes.
outcome: Becoming a professional teacher who is developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of reflective practice, collaborative action, and lifelong inquiry into teaching and learning., Developing a personal philosophy of and a vision for delivering technical content through education pedagogy., Develop understanding of how to integrate subject specific knowledge and pedagogy, nature of the discipline, and nature of learning in the college classroom., Designing learning environments that promote engaged learning., Developing skills in communication, management, and a variety of instructional and assessment strategies that contribute to meaningful instruction college classes., Becoming competent in selecting and integrating appropriate technological tools into instruction., 

class: EDUC 4402
class title: Anthropology of Education
description: This seminar examines public schools and other educational spaces as sites where knowledge, learning, learner, and identities are produced and contested. It explores how power and cultural norms work in educational settings, and the unintended teaching and learning that happens outside the purported curriculum. Topics include issues of multiculturalism and pluralism in schools and society, the school achievement of racial and ethnic minorities, youth cultures and identities, and literacy in adult learning spaces. This course is for students interested in the advanced study of multicultural schooling and education.
distribution categories: (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: EDUC 4720
class title: Philosophy of Education
description: What are the aims of schooling? How are those aims to be achieved? Can Artificial Intelligence be a 'teacher'? What interests guide the formation of educational aims? Questions such these are central to the formulation and reformulations of philosophy of education as they name topics like educational authority, virtues, curricular standards and the social/technological contexts of schooling among others. Drawing from both canonical and contemporary texts and their critics, this course provides an opportunity to analyze and interpret philosophies of education in the changing contexts of 21st century educational policy, neuroscience and technology and ongoing social, environmental and economic injustices.
outcome: Assess research findings on testing and measurement in mass education, school disciplinary practices, in contexts of racialization, multi-lingualism/linguistic diversity, gender, etc., Analyze educational policies in NYS and the US to identify the socio-cultural, economic interests and any stated ethical commitments that are articulated in defining terms such as "intelligence" "educational opportunity" or similarly "teacher" "learner" "knowledge" "objectivity" "mind" etc., Identify key formulations of virtue education, philosophies of care, feminist ethics, standpoint epistemology as relevant to the activities of teaching and learning toward broad social aims, especially with attention to democratic participation., Articulate defensible arguments for philosophies of/for educational practices (Aristotelian, Pragmatist, Feminist, Decolonial) or policies for two topics in education- testing, multicultural curriculum, anti-racist education, etc., Reflect on and apply at least one framework (virtue, standpoint epistemology) from a tradition in philosophy of education defending mass schooling and the a select few of the aims and policies which guide them., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: EDUC 4826
class title: Leading Dialogue Across Difference: Practicum in Intergroup Relations
description: Through theoretical and experiential learning, students in EDUC 4826 will further develop knowledge and skills gained in EDUC 2610 for leadership across social, cultural, and political differences. Through weekly seminar sessions, students gain a working knowledge of scholarly literature drawn from the fields of critical intergroup dialogue, practice theory, social identity theory, and social justice education. Students learn about the theories and empirical evidence on why and how communication and collaboration across difference work. Moreover, through unique experiential learning opportunities in the classroom, students practice communication and collaboration across difference, as well as facilitation skills fundamental to leading intergroup dialogue processes.
outcome: Communicate effectively across difference., Demonstrate disciplinary knowledge of literature on critical dialogue., Apply skills for leading individuals from different backgrounds within a multicultural society., Demonstrate capability to mediate conflict through dialogue for mutual understanding., Through critical reflection, examine how personal and group socialization connects with larger societal systems., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: EDUC 2610 or permission of instructor.

class: EDUC 4940
class title: Special Topics in Education
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and will be advertised by the department before the semester starts. Courses offered under this number will be approved by the department curriculum committee, and the same course is not offered more than twice under this number.

class: EDUC 4960
class title: Undergraduate Internship In Education
description: On-the-job learning experience under the supervision of professionals in a cooperating organization. A learning contract is written between the faculty supervisor and students, stating the conditions of the work assignment, supervision, and reporting. All 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at cals.cornell.edu/academics/student-research/internship.

class: EDUC 4970
class title: Individual Study in Education
description: A student may, with approval of a faculty advisor, study a problem or topic not covered in a regular course or may undertake tutorial study of an independent nature in an area of educational interest.

class: EDUC 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching
description: Participating students assist in teaching a course allied with their education and experience. Students are expected to meet regularly with a discussion or laboratory section, to gain teaching experience, and regularly to discuss teaching objectives, techniques, and subject matter with the professor in charge.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: EDUC 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Affords opportunities for students to carry out independent research under appropriate supervision. Each student is expected to review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, conduct the research, and prepare a report.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.7.

class: EDUC 5350
class title: Youth Organizations and Leadership Development
description: Participants learn how to facilitate both youth and adult volunteer leadership development. They examine factors affecting membership, purposes, design, operation, and administration of youth organizations.
outcome: Demonstrate application of experiential learning models in education., Explain how youth organizations relate to secondary education and career exploration., Demonstrate knowledge and skills necessary for managing a 4-H/FFA chapter., Explain how the 4-H/FFA functions on the local, state, and national levels., Apply youth leadership theory to development of targeted youth organizations., Engage in the issues surrounding youth development in education & society., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: EDUC 6720
class title: Philosophy of Education
description: What are the aims of schooling? How are those aims to be achieved? Can Artificial Intelligence be a 'teacher'? What interests guide the formation of educational aims? Questions such these are central to the formulation and reformulations of philosophy of education as they name topics like educational authority, virtues, curricular standards and the social/technological contexts of schooling among others. Drawing from both canonical and contemporary texts and their critics, this course provides an opportunity to analyze and interpret philosophies of education in the changing contexts of 21st century educational policy, neuroscience and technology and ongoing social, environmental and economic injustices.
outcome: Assess research findings on testing and measurement in mass education, school disciplinary practices, in contexts of racialization, multi-lingualism/linguistic diversity, gender, etc., Analyze educational policies in NYS and the US to identify the socio-cultural, economic interests and any stated ethical commitments that are articulated in defining terms such as "intelligence" "educational opportunity" or similarly "teacher" "learner" "knowledge" "objectivity" "mind" etc., Identify key formulations of virtue education, philosophies of care, feminist ethics, standpoint epistemology as relevant to the activities of teaching and learning toward broad social aims, especially with attention to democratic participation., Articulate defensible arguments for philosophies of/for educational practices (Aristotelian, Pragmatist, Feminist, Decolonial) or policies for two topics in education- testing, multicultural curriculum, anti-racist education, etc., Reflect on and apply at least one framework (virtue, standpoint epistemology) from a tradition in philosophy of education defending mass schooling and the a select few of the aims and policies which guide them., 

class: EDUC 7010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves collection and analysis of research data.

class: EDUC 7402
class title: Anthropology of Education
description: This seminar examines public schools and other educational spaces as sites where knowledge, learning, learner, and identities are produced and contested. It explores how power and cultural norms work in educational settings, and the unintended teaching and learning that happens outside the purported curriculum. Topics include issues of multiculturalism and pluralism in schools and society, the school achievement of racial and ethnic minorities, youth cultures and identities, and literacy in adult learning spaces. This course is for students interested in the advanced study of multicultural schooling and education.

class: ELSO 6210
class title: Improving Pronunciation
description: When we think about pronunciation, we often think about individual sounds, but other features of speech are often more important for making oneself understood. These features, such as pausing, intonation and stress, make up the melody of English. By the end of this course, students will increase their awareness of and control over the aspects of spoken English that most affect intelligibility, gain confidence for being understood by listeners, and develop strategies for more self-directed learning beyond the course.

class: ELSO 6220
class title: Taking Part in Discussions
description: Participating in class and group discussions is essential for becoming a part of academic and professional communities as discussions are used to share and create new knowledge, challenge ideas, negotiate identity, and have a voice. This course is designed to provide students with opportunities to improve participation and fluency in academic discussions. By the end of this course, students will learn strategies to prepare for entering, politely disagreeing, participating in, and leading discussions. This course will provide opportunities to try out new techniques and strategies in an interactive, supportive environment. Students will leave this course with more confidence to assert their voice and express their opinions.

class: ELSO 6230
class title: Designing and Delivering Effective Presentations
description: Whether presenting for seminars, journal club meetings, conferences, or in classes, being comfortable presenting is an essential part of graduate studies. This course will provide students with strategies for preparing and delivering presentations that are clear, compelling, persuasive, concise, and visually effective, as well as offer opportunities to practice delivering presentations in front of a supportive audience.

class: ELSO 6515
class title: Preparing to Write Workshop
description: This course is designed for multilingual domestic and international graduate and professional students who are in the early stages of a writing project or who want to learn strategies in preparation for future writing projects. During this course, students will explore general and discipline-specific writing processes, approaches to understanding types of writing in their field, strategies for reading and note-taking, library resources specific to their field, ways to use technology to support writing, and approaches for generating ideas and prose with more ease. Students will have time during class to apply the strategies to a current or upcoming writing project.

class: ELSO 6535
class title: Research Paper Writing Workshop
description: This course is designed to assist multilingual domestic and international graduate and professional students in making progress on drafting a research paper (e.g., research article, dissertation, thesis, seminar paper, conference paper, research proposal). Students will discuss features of research papers (e.g., review of the literature, sections of research papers), learn about strategies for writing (e.g., constructing paragraphs, determining structure), and practice strategies for setting and meeting writing goals.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: ELSO 6515.

class: ELSO 6565
class title: Thesis and Dissertation Writing Workshop
description: This course is designed to assist multilingual domestic and international graduate and professional students in making progress on drafting parts of their theses and dissertations. This course provides writing strategies, structured writing time, a supportive writing community, and access to writing resources.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: ELSO 6515 and/or ELSO 6535.

class: ELSO 6595
class title: Revising and Editing Workshop
description: This course is designed to assist multilingual domestic and international graduate and professional students who have writing that they want to assess and improve. Students will work on matters such as organization, argument, framing, editing for style, creating flow, modifying syntax, proofreading for surface-level errors, assessing the incorporation of source material (i.e., references), utilizing GAI tools (e.g. ChatGPT), and improving overall readability.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: ELSO 6515, ELSO 6535, and/or ELSO 6565.

class: ELSO 6610
class title: Communicating in the Workplace
description: This course is designed for multilingual and international graduate and professional students who will need to communicate in English in professional contexts. Students will learn about differences between academic and workplace communication, explore communication strategies effective for different workplace situations, and consider cultural aspects of workplace communication. 

class: ELSO 6620
class title: Preparing for the Professional Job Search
description: This course introduces a series of professional job application steps, including the giving elevator pitches, networking, searching for jobs, interpreting job ads, attending job fairs, making digital profiles, writing resumes and cover letters, interviewing, and becoming familiar with relevant resources. By the end of this course, students will be aware of the different dimensions of applying for professional jobs, including their cultural and linguistic implications.  This course will be useful to students to develop their job application documents and skills.

class: ENGL 1105
class title: FWS: Writing and Sexual Politics
description: Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all will in some way address the subject of sexual politics. Some sections may deal with fiction, poetry, film, or drama, and many include a mix of literary genres. Students will practice close, attentive, and imaginative reading and writing. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1111
class title: FWS: Writing Across Cultures
description: Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all will engage in some way with an aspect of culture or subculture. Some sections may deal with fiction, poetry, film, or drama, and many include a mix of literary genres. Students will practice close, attentive, and imaginative reading and writing. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1130
class title: FWS: Writing the Environment
description: Our human abilities to communicate about nature, the environment, and climate change are challenged by the scale and scope of the topics. This course enables students to read, write, and design forms of communication that engage with the environment, in order to inform, advocate, and to connect with our world. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1134
class title: FWS: True Stories
description: How do we understand the reality of others? For that matter, how do we know and understand our own experience? One answer is writing: writing can crystalize lived experience for others. We can record our observations, our thoughts, our feelings and insights and hopes and failures, to communicate them, to understand them. In this course, we will read nonfiction narratives that explore and shape the self and reality, including the personal essay, memoir, autobiography, documentary film, and journalism. We will write essays that explore and explain these complex issues of presenting one's self and others.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1140
class title: FWS: Writing Medicine: Stories of Illness and Healing
description: What does it mean to be healthy? How do we describe our pain? Who becomes a physician? The practice of medicine isn't confined to scientific knowledge: it raises difficult questions about culture, identity, and bodies, and the stories we tell about all of these. This course will focus on works of literature and media to think about how medical care changes across time and place, and to explore images and narratives that shape our expectations about illness and health. Short writing assignments and longer essays will develop your critical thinking, strengthen your writing skills, and build your awareness of the complex cultural landscape of medical care.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1158
class title: FWS: Reading Film: Culture, Politics, & Aesthetics
description: Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all will engage in some way with an aspect of American culture. Some sections may deal with fiction, poetry, film, or drama, and many include a mix of literary genres. Students will practice close, attentive, and imaginative reading and writing. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1160
class title: FWS: Intersections: Race, Writing, and Power
description: How does race inform the way we understand the world around us? How do writers explore their experiences of race and colonialism to challenge conventional notions of nation, citizenship, knowledge, and self? In this class, we engage materials that complicate our ideas of race in order to imagine new forms of identity, social life, and political possibility. We engage with creators who are Black, Brown, Indigenous, People of Color, or from the Global South. The works we study may include podcasts, graphic novels, memoirs, poetry, plays, or films. Writing projects may be critical, creative, or research-based, as we develop our understanding of race and identity and by extension our capacities as writers.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1167
class title: FWS: Reading Now
description: Reading is experiencing a new revolution in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. We still read paper books, but we also read by scrolling on screen, through search engines, and in images and memes. What kinds of texts are emerging in this new era, and how do we read them? How do writing—and our ways of reading—connect with the urgent topics before us now: technology and social control, truth and media, climate change and apocalypse, identity, equality, and human rights? This course will examine the past twenty years of writing in a variety of genres, printed and/or online, from fiction to memoir to poetry and beyond. As we read, we will explore and discover the forms that our own writing can take in response.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1168
class title: FWS: Cultural Studies
description: From TV news to rock lyrics, from ads to political speeches to productions of Shakespeare, the forms of culture surround us at every moment. In addition to entertaining us or enticing us, they carry implied messages about who we are, what world we live in, and what we should value. Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all are built on the assumption that learning to decode these messages is a survival skill in today's media-saturated world and also excellent training for reading literature. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1170
class title: FWS: Short Stories
description: What can a short story do that no other art form can do? We all consume and produce stories. To write about how narrative works, both within and against tradition, is to touch the core of identity, the quick of what makes us human. Storytelling informs all writing. Engaging diverse authors, we will practice not only reading sensitively and incisively but also making evidence-based arguments with power and grace, learning the habits of writing, revision, and documentation that allow us to join public or scholarly conversation. We will embrace "shortness" as a compression of meaning to unpack. Our own writing may include close analyses of texts, syntheses that place stories in critical dialogue, and both creative and research-based projects.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1183
class title: FWS: Word and Image
description: What happens when we adapt books into movies, write fan-fiction about video games, or create poetry about paintings? What happens when we write about one genre as though it were another? We have been writing about images and making images about writing for a long time. In addition to conventional types of art and literature like paintings, novels, or poetry, other forms such as film, video games, exhibitions, and virtual reality offer lively areas for analysis. In this class, we will engage with widely varied cultural forms—including, perhaps, experimental poetry, medieval manuscripts, graphic novels, memoirs, plays, films, podcasts, and more—to develop multiple media literacies as we sharpen our own writing about culture, literature, and art.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1191
class title: FWS: British Literature
description: Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all will engage in some way with the subject of British literature. Some sections may deal with fiction, poetry, or drama, and many include a mix of literary genres. Students will practice close, attentive, and imaginative reading and writing. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 1270
class title: FWS: Writing About Literature
description: Reading lists vary from section to section, but close, attentive, and imaginative reading and writing are central to all. Some sections may deal with fiction, poetry, or drama, or include a mix of literary kinds. By engaging in discussions and working with varied writing assignments, students will explore major modes and genres of English poetry and prose, and may learn about versification techniques, rhetorical strategies, performance as interpretation, and thematic and topical concerns. In the process students will expand the possibilities of their own writing. Sections that invite students to study and write critically about plays or films in a variety of dramatic idioms and cultural traditions may require attendance at screenings or at live productions by the theatre department. All sections are taught by Department of English faculty. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ENGL 2010
class title: Literatures in English I: From Old English to the New World
description: English 2010 is an introduction to key works of English and American literature for majors and non-majors. Here's a chance to study some of the greatest hits of the literary tradition in a single semester: Beowulf; Arthurian legends; works by Chaucer, Shakespeare, Anne Bradstreet, Ben Franklin, Sageyowatha, Phillis Wheatley. Reading across history and geography allows us to ask big questions about literature and society. How did literature factor in England's transformation from a cultural backwater into a global empire? What role does literature play in disciplining, civilizing, and colonizing subjects? When and how is it used to delight, resist, and rebel? From our reading, we will create a toolkit of literary terms and techniques. And through a series of exercises, students will get hands-on experience with literary experimentation. The class counts toward the pre-1800 requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2270
class title: Shakespeare
description: This course aims to give students a good historical and critical grounding in Shakespeare's drama and its central and continuing place in Renaissance culture and beyond. We will read poetry and primarily plays representing the shape of Shakespeare's career as it moves through comedies, histories, tragedies, and a romance.  Specific plays include The Two Gentleman of Verona, Richard II, Henry IV (Part 1), Henry V, Hamlet, Measure for Measure, Othello, Macbeth and The Tempest. We will focus on dramatic forms (genres), Shakespeare's themes, and social and historical contexts. The course combines lectures and hands-on work in weekly discussions.  While we will view some scenes from film adaptations, the main focus is on careful close interaction with the language of the plays. This class counts toward the pre-1800 requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2400
class title: Introduction to U.S. Latinx Literature
description: Latina/os have always been part of U.S. history, yet the media often represents Latinx as only recent immigrants or as stereotypes that reduce rich cultures into a single, unified category or group of people. This practice hides the many unique and varied voices, stories, experiences, and ideas produced by Latinx expressive practices in forms ranging from novels and poetry to podcasts, tiktoks, films, theater, comics, memoirs, visual arts, and dance. This course will sample all of these forms while considering how artists meditate on their experiences of home, friendship, languages, love, migration, education, racialization, within the contexts of histories of colonization, discrimination, war, invasion, revolution, and ongoing activist organizing for resistance, sustainability, and thriving futures. In addition to common material, students will also have the chance to explore specific expressive practices that interest them.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2580
class title: Imagining the Holocaust
description: How is the memory of the Holocaust kept alive by means of the literary and visual imagination? Within the historical context of the Holocaust and how and why it occurred, we shall examine major and widely read Holocaust narratives that have shaped the way we understand and respond to the Holocaust. We also study ethical and psychological issues about how and why people behave in dire circumstances. We shall begin with first-person reminiscences—Wiesel's Night , Levi's Survival at Auschwitz, and The Diary of Anne Frank—before turning to realistic fictions such as Kineally's Schindler's List (and Spielberg's film), Kertesz's Fateless, Kosinski's The Painted Bird, and Ozick's "The Shawl." We shall also read the Kafkaesque parable of Appelfeld's Badenheim 1939 and the fantastic cartoons of Spiegelman's Maus books as well as W.G, Sebald's Austerlitz. We shall conclude with several episodes of the acclaimed 2009-2017 French TV series A French Village.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2603
class title: The Novels of Toni Morrison
description: Each year this seven-week, one-credit course focuses on a different novel by Nobel Laureate and Cornell alumna Toni Morrison. We read and discuss each novel in the context of Morrison's life and career, her place in African American, US, and world literature, and her exploration of crucial questions regarding identity, race, gender, history, oppression, and autonomy. Please see the class roster for the current semester's featured novel. Students will read the novel closely, with attention to its place in Morrison's career and in literary and cultural history.

class: ENGL 2620
class title: Introduction to Asian American Literature
description: This course will introduce both a variety of writings and media by Asian North American authors and some critical issues concerning the production and reception of Asian American texts. Working with a variety of genres, we will be asking questions about the relation between literary forms and the socio-historical context within which they take on their meanings, and about the historical formation of Asian American identities. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2650
class title: Introduction to African American Literature
description: This course will introduce students to African American literary traditions in the space that would become North America. From early freedom narratives and poetry to Hip-Hop and film, we will trace a range of artistic conventions and cultural movements while paying close attention to broader historical shifts in American life over the past three centuries. We'll read broadly: poetry, fiction, speculative fiction, newspapers, and the like. We will ask: How do authors create, define, and even exceed a tradition? What are some of the recurring themes and motifs within this tradition? Authors may include: Phillis Wheatley, David Walker, Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, W.E.B. DuBois, Zora Neale Hurston, James Baldwin, Octavia Butler, Toni Morrison, and Eve Ewing. This course satisfies the Literatures of the Americas requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (D-AG)

class: ENGL 2754
class title: Wondrous Literatures of the Near East
description: This course examines Near East's rich and diverse literary heritage. We will read a selection of influential and wondrous texts from ancient to modern times, spanning geographically from the Iberian peninsula to Iran. We will explore a range of ancient myths of creation and destruction. We will also trace encounters with otherness in travel narratives. Together we will read and discuss such ancient works as the "The Story of Sinuhe" and "The Epic of Gilgamesh," as well as selections from the Hebrew Bible, New Testament and Qur'an. We will explore medieval works such as the "Travels" of Ibn Battuta, the "Shahnameh" of Ferdowsi, and "The Arabian Nights." We will also read Orhan Pamuk's My Name is Red, and Sonia Nimr's Wondrous Journeys in Strange Lands, as well as excerpts from Yochi Brandes's The Orchard. Students will also have the opportunity to research and analyze primary source materials in the collections of Cornell Rare Books and Manuscript Collection, and the Johnson Art Museum. All material is in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2761
class title: American Cinema
description: From the beginning of the twentieth century to the present moment, movies - and in particular Hollywood - have profoundly influenced the ways in which people see, think and talk about the world. Focusing mostly on Hollywood film, this course introduces the study of American cinema from multiple perspectives: as an economy and mode of production; as an art form that produces particular aesthetic styles; as a cultural institution that comments on contemporary issues and allows people to socialize. We will consider the rise of Hollywood in the age of mass production; the star system; the introduction of sound and the function of the soundtrack; Hollywood's rivalry with television; censorship; the rise of independent film, etc. Weekly screenings introduce major American genres (e.g. science fiction, film noir, the musical) and directors (e.g. Hitchcock, Kubrick, Tarantino).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2771
class title: Africa in Hollywood
description: In Eddie Murphy's Coming to America, Africa is a place of nobility, where even lions are at peace with lambs. In contrast, Leonardo DeCaprio's Blood Diamond is a violent look at the role the demand for diamonds has played in destabilizing mineral-rich African countries. But if Hollywood has long been concerned with depicting Africa in particular ways, African filmmakers are at the same time creating their own stories. Popular and scholarly film critics are also contributing to the battle over who speaks for Africa. In this course we will explore these competing images of Africa, questions of imagination versus reality, and the extent to which artists should, if at all, be responsible to the subject of their art.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2800
class title: Creative Writing
description: An introductory course in the theory, practice, and reading of fiction, poetry, and allied forms. Both narrative and verse readings are assigned. Students will learn to savor and practice the craft of poetry and narrative writing, developing techniques that inform both. Some class meetings may feature peer review of student work, and instructors may assign writing exercises or prompts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of a First-Year Writing Seminar (FWS) course.

class: ENGL 2880
class title: Expository Writing
description: This course offers guidance and an audience for students who wish to gain skill in expository writing—a common term for critical, reflective, investigative, and creative nonfiction. Each section provides a context for writing defined by a form of exposition, a disciplinary area, a practice, or a topic intimately related to the written medium. Course members will read in relevant published material and write and revise their own work regularly, while reviewing and responding to one another's. Students and instructors will confer individually throughout the term. Topics differ for each section. Please see the Class Roster for more details. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of First-Year Writing Seminar requirement or permission of the instructor.

class: ENGL 2906
class title: Punk Culture: The Art and Politics of Refusal
description: Punk Culture–comprised of music, fashion, literature, and visual arts–represents a complex critical stance of resistance and refusal that coalesced at a particular historical moment in the mid-1970s, and continues to be invoked, revived, and revised. In this course we will explore punk's origins in New York and London, U.S. punk's regional differences (the New York scene's connection to the art and literary worlds, Southern California's skate and surf culture, etc.), its key movements (hardcore, straight edge, riot grrrl, crust, queercore), its race, class and gender relations, and its ongoing influence on global youth culture. We will read, listen, and examine a variety of visual media to analyze how punk draws from and alters previous aesthetic and political movements. No previous experience studying music is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2935
class title: New Visions in African Cinema
description: This undergraduate course introduces the formal and topical innovations that African cinema has experienced since its inception in the 1960s. Sections will explore, among others, Nollywood, sci-fi, and ideological cinema. Films include: Abderrahmane Sissako's Bamako, Mohamed Camara's Dakan, Djibril Diop Mambéty's Touki-Bouki, Cheikh Oumar Sissoko's Finzan, Anne-Laure Folly's Women with Open Eyes, Ousmane Sembène's Camp de Thiaroye, Jean-Pierre Bekolo's Quartier Mozart.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 2951
class title: Poetry's Image
description: Where do we get our images of poets, and of poetry? Along with the images we find in poems themselves, how do poetry and poets figure in fiction and film, in music and popular culture? How do such figures inform both the images we find in poems and poetry's own image? What is poetry's relation to other genres, discourses, and disciplines, to self and language, history and politics? Exploring such issues in verse and prose, in fiction, film, and other media, including among others Blake, Wordsworth, Keats, Dickinson, Poe, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Pound, Stein, Williams, Neruda, Parra, and Bolaño, the course will arc toward such impactful contemporaries as Cathy Park Hong, Claudia Rankine, Layla Long Soldier,  Kendrick Lamar, Ilya Kaminsky, Jenny Xie, the website-based Young Hae Chang Heavy Industries, and AI-generated poetry.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3110
class title: Old English
description: English has a recorded history longer and more variable than any other language, including poetry and prose as skillful as writings in any period. While learning the language (especially in the first half of the course) we will investigate writings that exploit the language's powers and complexities from the earliest pieces into "early Middle English," when the language and its literary traditions disintegrated and began being reinvented at the Norman Conquest. We will also sample (in translation) Latin, Old Saxon, and Old Norse materials that fed the multilingual and multicultural world in which early English developed.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3115
class title: Video and New Media: Art, Theory, Politics
description: The course will offer an overview of video art, alternative documentary video, and digital installation and networked art. It will analyze four phases of video and new media: (1) the development of video from its earliest turn away from television; (2) video's relation to art and installation; (3) video's migration into digital art; (4) the relation of video and new media to visual theory and social movements. Screenings will include early political and feminist video (Ant Farm, Rosler, Paper Tiger TV, Jones), conceptual video of the '80s and '90s (Vasulka, Lucier, Viola, Hill), gay and multicultural video of the '90s (Muntadas, Riggs, Piper, Fung, Parmar), networked and activist new media of the 21st century (Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, SubRosa, Preemptive Media). Secondary theoretical readings on postmodernism, video theory, multicultural theory, and digital culture will provide students with a cultural and political context for the discussion of video and new media style, dissemination, and reception.

class: ENGL 3240
class title: Blood Politics: Comparative Renaissance Drama
description: Blood is everywhere. From vampire shows to video games, our culture seems to be obsessed with it. The course examines the power of "blood" in the early modern period as a figure that continues to capture our imagination, not only as a marker of racial, religious, and sexual difference and desire, but also as a dramatic player in its own right. How does a politics of blood appear on stage when populations are being expelled and colonized for reasons (mis)understood in terms of blood? In the course of trying to answer this and other questions of blood, we will read plays by Shakespeare, Webster, Kyd, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, and Calderón de la Barca. Topics include honor, revenge, purity, the body, sexuality, conversion, and death.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3360
class title: American Drama and Theatre
description: Explores major American playwrights from 1900 to 1960, introducing students to American theatre as a significant part of modern American cultural history. We will consider the ways in which theatre has contributed to the construction and deconstruction of a national identity. Similarly, we will examine the influence of the American Theatre on and in film. We will pay special attention to the social, political, and aesthetic contexts of the time period and discuss the shifting popularity of dramatic forms, including melodrama, realism, expressionism, absurdism, and the folk play, in the American theatre canon. Authors include O'Neill, Glaspell, Odets, Rice, Hellman, Hughes, Miller, Williams, and Albee, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3390
class title: Jane Austen
description: It is a truth universally acknowledged, that students who have read Jane Austen must be in want of an opportunity to continue that delicious experience, and that those who have not read her novels should. This course explores Austen's characters, culture, and narrative art against the backdrop of films, novels, and poems which resonate with her fiction. We will investigate Austen's importance in literary history as well as her continuing attraction in the twenty-first century. By immersing ourselves in her fictional world we will enrich our experience of her novels and sharpen our awareness of the pleasures of reading.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3500
class title: The High Modernist Tradition
description: Critical, historical and interdisciplinary study of major works by Joyce, Woolf, Conrad, Forster, Lawrence, Eliot, Yeats, Wilde, Hardy, and Hopkins. The emphasis will be on the joy of close reading of wonderful, powerful, and innovative individual works, all of which I love to teach. We shall place the authors and works within the context of literary, political, cultural, and intellectual history. The course will seek to define the development of literary modernism (mostly but not exclusively in England), and relate literary modernism in England to that in Europe and America as well as to other intellectual developments. We shall be especially interested in the relationship between modern literature and modern painting and sculpture. Within this course, I work closely with  students as they  select and develop the topics on which they write essays.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3505
class title: Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes
description: This course offers an opportunity to read in depth two major writers of the twentieth century, Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston.  Friends and one-time collaborators in the New York City of the 1920s, each had important careers that extended long after the Harlem Renaissance period in which they achieved early renown.  This class will survey the myriad genres in which each writer worked (short stories, poetry, novels, drama, critical writing, folklore and anthropology).  And it will also consider the literary, cultural, and political contexts in which both writers achieved early renown and which their work critically contested.  The class concludes by examining the reading works of later major authors (Toni Morrison, Harryette Mullen) who drew directly with Hughes' and Hurston's legacy.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3560
class title: Thinking from a Different Place: Indigenous Philosophies
description: The Western nation-state has failed to solve the two most pressing, indeed catastrophic, global problems: poverty and climate change. This failure is due to the inability of national policy to imagine a world beyond a boundary drawn by the formative capitalist ideas of property, production, and profit. The course will begin by discussing the historical origin and continuing force of these ideas while raising questions about their limits. Then it will look at a range of alternative ideas about how the world should work if we want to keep it socially, economically, and ecologically in balance. The alternatives we will query come from a range of Indigenous writers of fiction, poetry, and theory, who locate themselves in Native American (north and south), Aboriginal, and Maori communities.
outcome: Explain Indigenous theory and practice in dealing with social, economic, and environmental issues., Contrast Indigenous theory and practice with Western approaches to these issues at a time of gross income inequality and environmental collapse worldwide., Think critically about the most effective ways to deal with these global issues after having considered both approaches to these issues., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3591
class title: Kids Rule! Children's Popular Culture
description: How is the figure of the child constructed in popular culture? When and to what degree do children participate in the construction of these representations? This course surveys a variety of contemporary media texts (television, film, and the internet) aimed at children ranging in age from pre-kindergarten to young adults. We explore how these texts seek to construct children as empowered consumers, contesting adult conformity. Our theoretical approach complicates definitions of childhood as a time of innocence and potential victimhood and challenges normative constructions of childhood as a time for establishing "proper" sexual and gender identities. Taking a cultural studies approach, the class will consider the connections between the cultural texts and the realms of advertising, toys, and gaming.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3678
class title: Diasporas, Disasters, and Dissent: Re-Thinking Puerto Rican Studies in the 20th and 21st Centuries
description: "Foreign in a domestic sense" is the perplexing way that the Supreme Court of the United States chose to define Puerto Rico's status in the so-called "Insular Cases" of the early 20th century. Written over 100 years ago, this contradictory ruling looms large over Puerto Rico's precarious legal standing, despite the fact that there are now more Puerto Ricans living on the US mainland than in the island itself. Seeking to counter the obfuscation of Puerto Rico in the US imaginary, in this course students will analyze how key historical, political, and social moments connected to diasporas, disasters, and dissent have galvanized Puerto Rican cultural production in the 20th and 21st centuries.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: ENGL 3742
class title: Africans and African Americans in Literature
description: When an African and an African American meet, solidarity is presumed, but often friction is the result.  In this course, we will consider how Africans and African Americans see each other through literature.  What happens when two peoples suffering from double consciousness meet?  We will examine the influence of historical forces including slavery, colonialism and pan-Africanism on the way writers explore the meeting between Africans and African Americans. Specifically we will look at how writers and political figures such as Maya Angelou, Chimamanda Adichie, Richard Wright, Eugene Robinson, Philippe Wamba, Martin Luther King Junior and Malcolm X have understood the meeting.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3760
class title: World Poetry of the Pluriverse: Regional Forms and Global Readers
description: How do poems travel in the world? How does the world travel in poems? In this seminar, we'll read global case studies in the ways poems can sanctify or protest territorial and linguistic borders, as well as reading diverse critical accounts of the translation, marketing, and archiving of "world literature." We'll study how poetry compares with other communication technologies, enacting its own forms of transit, ecology, and migration. Our readings (across all of time, though focused on the 19th-21st centuries) will investigate how race, class, and gender inflect verse's navigations of local conditions and cosmopolitan scale. Authors may include T.S. Eliot, Rabindranath Tagore, W.B. Yeats, Lorna Goodison, Yi Sang, Derek Walcott, Daphne Marlatt, Christopher Okigbo, M. NourbeSe Philip, Ilya Kaminsky, Ishion Hutchinson, and Valzhyna Mort.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3795
class title: Communicating Climate Change
description: There is a lot of consensus about the science of climate change. But many members of the public remain confused or uninformed about the severity of the situation. Some are paralyzed by fear. Others are blissfully ignorant. What are the best ways of communicating climate change to a variety of audiences? Should we tell stories? Make documentaries? Dramatize the science? This course will ask you to read, write and design many different forms and genres in order to experiment with the problem of communicating climate change, from pie-charts to science fiction and from photography to TED Talks. What can each form tell us about climate change that the others cannot? We will take on a real-world communication project over the course of the semester.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3820
class title: Narrative Writing
description: This course focuses upon the writing of fiction or related narrative forms. May include significant reading and discussion, explorations of form and technique, completion of writing assignments and prompts, and workshop peer review of student work. Many students will choose to write short stories, but excerpts from longer works will also be accepted.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGL 2800.

class: ENGL 3840
class title: Poetry Writing
description: This course focuses upon the writing of poetry. May include significant reading and discussion, explorations of form and technique, completion of writing assignments and prompts, and workshop peer review of student work.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGL 2800.

class: ENGL 3903
class title: Remembering Socialism: Literature and Film After the End of History
description: More than thirty years after the end of the Soviet Union, we have the distance needed to view the twentieth-century state socialist project from a historical perspective–even as Cold War tropes are revived amid another major confrontation with Russia. In this course, we will analyze memoirs, oral histories, historical fiction, films, and TV shows that look back at this period. How do the makers of these works use genre as a political as well as artistic tool? What are the political implications of comedy, cosplay, or melodrama when applied to communism? How does the portrayal of this period change as state socialism recedes into the distance? Texts from Russia, Ukraine, Germany, the Balkans, the UK, and the United States.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3911
class title: Literature, Art, and the Environment
description: This course examines how philosophical, architectural, filmic, and literary practices shape our understanding of place and space, engaging with theories of mapping, spatiality, and the built environment. Does dwelling on this earth imply building? Is thinking itself an architectural act? What would it mean to undo this 'will to architecture'? What is the relation of the act to the environment? What does the situation of 'things and locations' mean for the possibilities of politics and thought? We will examine poetic and philosophical dimensions of place and site; modernity, nihilism, and its critique; belonging, the uncanny, and the stranger; utopia, dystopia, and the global built environment through readings, films, and artistic practices from figures and groups including Archigram, Bachelard, Badiou, Massimo Cacciari, Derrida, Heidegger, Isozaki Arata, Jameson, Karatani, Kiarostami, Henri Lefebvre, WG Sebald, Wallace Stevens, Superstudio, Manfredo Tafuri, Tarkovsky, Raymond Williams, and more.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 3941
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: ENGL 4020
class title: Literature as Moral Inquiry
description: What can literary works, especially novels, tell us about moral issues? Should they be seen as suggesting a form of moral inquiry similar to the kind of philosophical discussion we get in, say, Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics? Can reading philosophical works in ethics together with novels that deal with similar themes help us understand these themes better? This course is an attempt to answer these questions. We will read selections from Aristotle, Kant, and other thinkers and use these works to help us understand the nature of moral inquiry in novels like Eliot's Middlemarch, Morrison's The Bluest Eye, Flaubert's Madame Bovary, Tolstoy's The Death of Ivan Ilyich, and Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day.  Films will include Barbie (2023) and Official Secrets (2019).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4030
class title: Poetry in Process
description: Many distinguished poets have taught at Cornell. In this course we'll focus on three, all of them widely acclaimed: A. R. Ammons, Alice Fulton, Ishion Hutchinson. A. R. Ammons is best known for charting the interplay of scientific and spiritual phenomena, in poems ranging from brief lyrics to book-length epics written on adding machine tape. Alice Fulton, who was Ammons's student, carries on his interests in science and spirituality while bringing to them a distinctively feminist perspective. Born in Jamaica, Ishion Hutchinson writes poems that explore the fraught relations between geography and history in the light of colonial violence.  We'll survey each poet's work from earliest to most recent phases, paying special attention to their development of new techniques and original visions. Students may write poems as well as critical essays responding to the poets' work.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4240
class title: Metamorphoses in Renaissance Literature and Culture
description: Stories of transformation have been central to literary traditions for thousands of years, but these tales of shape-shifting took on a special life in the English Renaissance, when Ovid's Metamorphoses surged in popularity. This course will explore the fundamental connection between literary creativity and unstable identities – whether these narratives of metamorphosis show humans turning to beasts, trees, or stones, men changing into women, or inanimate objects coming to life and taking human form. Class readings draw on examples from Ovid, Shakespeare, and other Renaissance poets, as well as the re-imagining of these fantasies in modern science fiction and make-over shows. What do these stories of metamorphosis tell us about what it means to be human – or not?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4625
class title: Contemporary Native American Fiction
description: If you haven't read contemporary U.S. American Indian fiction, then it might be fair to ask how much you know about the United States, its origins and its current condition. Since the 1960s, American Indians have been producing a significant body of award-wining novels and short stories. In 1969, for example, N. Scott Momaday, from the Kiowa nation, won the Pulitzer Prize for his novel House Made of Dawn and in 2012 Louise Erdrich, who is Anishinaabe, won the National Book Award for her novel The Round House. In between these two notable moments and since we can list an impressive number of Native storytellers whose work is aesthetically powerful, offering us a narrative of the United States that counters the official history. Centrally the course will focus on the various formal approaches Native writers take from surrealism to realism in representing the (post)colonial situation of Indian country and the ongoing resistance in Indian country to the U.S. legal and political regime.
outcome: Identify contemporary Indigenous writer and the genders they are writing in., Communicate the main theme in the discussed novels that relate to contemporary and historical issues in Indigenous communities, such as land rights, child welfare, protection of Indigenous women, Indigenous governance systems, construction of racial and colonial regimes, etc., Analyze historical and legal trends in Indigenous-federal relations., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4675
class title: The Environmental Imagination in American Literature
description: This course focuses on works that exemplify environmental consciousness—a sense that humans are not the center of the world and that to think they are may have catastrophic consequences for humans themselves. Environmental literature is not just a major strand of American literature but one of its most distinctive contributions to the literature of the world. We will be reading works mainly from the 19th and 20th centuries, both poetry and fiction, confronting the challenges of thinking and writing with an ecological consciousness in the 21st. Cornell being a rich environment in which to pursue such investigations, creative projects will be encouraged. Inspiration is assured.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4696
class title: Political Violence in Contemporary Fiction: Silence as Compassion or Complicity
description: This course examines contemporary works of fiction that depict episodes of political violence between WWII and today. During this period, there have been 344 conflicts that have killed 500 or more people, but the public attention they receive varies tremendously. New novels and stories disclose and challenge silences surrounding events neglected in global public memory. What role can these works play in altering the kinds of stories heard within and beyond the university? Which voices do they portray as empowered or neglected? How can silence around violence be both compassionate and complicit? What are the ethics of storytelling related to different forms of silence, and what does it mean to read in a way that is compassionate or complicitly silent?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4705
class title: Human-Centered Design and Engaged Media
description: This StudioLab course connects critical design teams with researchers, NGOs, and nonprofits working on human rights, public health, and environmental and land rights in the US and abroad. Practicing methods of transmedia knowledge, critical design thinking, and strategic storytelling, students collaborate on projects with the Center on the Death Penalty Worldwide, Health Access Connect (Uganda), NYS 4-H, and SOOFA Ranch (GA). Consulting on partners' ongoing projects, teams study and practice processes from IDEO's Human-Centered Design Thinking and Stanford's Design for Extreme Affordability, as well as UX, tactical media, and activist organizing developed by ACT-UP, Black Lives Matter, Guerrilla Girls, and contemporary, multi-platform campaigns, presenting and sharing their collaborations via project site and other platforms.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4800
class title: Advanced Poetry Writing
description: This course is intended for creative writers who have completed  ENGL 3840 and wish to refine their poetry writing. It may include significant reading and discussion, explorations of form and technique, completion of writing assignments and prompts, and workshop peer review of student work. In addition to the instructor's assigned writing requirements, students may work on longer-form verse writing projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGL 3840 is strongly recommended.

class: ENGL 4801
class title: Advanced Narrative Writing
description: This course is intended for narrative writing students who have completed ENGL 3820 and wish to refine their writing. It may include significant reading and discussion, explorations of form and technique, completion of writing assignments and prompts, and workshop peer review of student work. In addition to the instructor's assigned writing requirements, students may work on longer-form narrative writing projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Highly recommended prerequisite: ENGL 3820.

class: ENGL 4820
class title: Shakespeare's Hamlet: The Seminar
description: The most studied and written about work in Western Literature outside the Bible, Hamlet according to Harold Bloom, is our secular savior and our ambassador to death. This course centers on a close reading of the play. Through research and assigned readings the course tests theoretical viewpoints about the play against the text itself by reading the theory in relationship to the production history.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4850
class title: Reading for Writers
description: Reading for Writers examines literary works through the eyes of a writer, focusing on the craft of literature. Topics vary with each section and semester and may focus on fiction, poetry, or both. Please see the class roster for a description.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4912
class title: Black Women's Autobiography in the 21st Century WritingHerStory
description: Black women first began to shape the genre of autobiography during antebellum era slavery. They were prolific in developing the genre of autobiography throughout the twentieth century, to the point of emerging as serial autobiographers in the case of Maya Angelou. Significantly, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1970), the first autobiography of six by Angelou, along with autobiographies by a range of other black women writers, helped to launch the renaissance in black women's literature and criticism in African American literature during the 1970s. In this course, we will focus on how black women have continued to write and share their personal stories in the new millennium by examining autobiographies that they have produced in the first years of the twenty-first century. More broadly, we will consider the impact of this writing on twenty-first century African American literature, as well as African diasporan writing in Africa and the Caribbean. In the process, we will draw on a range of critical and theoretical perspectives.  We will read memoirs and autobiographies by a range of figures, including Michelle Obama, Jennifer Lewis, Monica Coleman, Serena Williams, Gabrielle Union, and Tiffany Haddish, among others. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENGL 4930
class title: Honors Essay Tutorial I
description: Students should secure a thesis advisor by the end of the junior year and should enroll in that faculty member's section of ENGL 4930. Students enrolling in the fall will automatically be enrolled in a discussion section, which will meet a few times throughout the semester and will give students a chance to get together with other honors students to discuss issues pertinent to writing a thesis. Topics will include compiling a critical bibliography and writing a prospectus. The Honors Director in English will contact students to set up the first meeting time.

class: ENGL 4940
class title: Honors Essay Tutorial II
description: This course is the second of a two-part series of courses required for students pursuing a Bachelor of Arts with Honors in English. The first course in the series is ENGL 4930 Honors Essay Tutorial I.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGL 4930.

class: ENGL 4950
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: ENGL 6000
class title: Colloquium for Entering Students
description: An introduction to practical and theoretical aspects of graduate English studies, conducted with the help of weekly visitors from the Literatures in English department. There will be regular short readings and brief presentations, but no formal papers. The colloquium is required for all entering PhD students; MFA students are welcome to attend any sessions that interest them.

class: ENGL 6110
class title: Old English
description: English has a recorded history longer and more variable than any other language, including poetry and prose as skillful as writings in any period. While learning the language (especially in the first half of the course) we will investigate writings that exploit the language's powers and complexities from the earliest pieces into "early Middle English," when the language and its literary traditions disintegrated and began being reinvented at the Norman Conquest. We will also sample (in translation) Latin, Old Saxon, and Old Norse materials that fed the multilingual and multicultural world in which early English developed.

class: ENGL 6235
class title: Making Use of Renaissance Literature
description: English Renaissance poetry boasted a classically inspired commitment to "pleasure and profit," but a cognate concern with utility and experience permeated both literature the vernacular technologies of everyday life. This course considers the ubiquity of "how-to" writing in early modern England, as such imperatives shaped both lived experience and cultural production. Readings draw from prose and poetic genres (including essay, dialogue, and pamphlet; and lyric, didactic and devotional verse) and cover practical and impractical advice on conduct, the passions, and technologies of everyday life, including recipes, letters, hygiene, and diet. We will weigh the virtues of a range of historical and theoretical approaches to these questions, including new historicism, psychoanalysis, theories of racialization and embodiment, the sociology of manners, feminist criticism, and biopolitics and governmentality.

class: ENGL 6330
class title: Animals, Affect, and Climate: The Counterhuman Imaginary
description: This course juxtaposes core strains of current posthumanist theory—new materialism or "thing theory," the "affective turn," ecocriticism or environmental humanities, and literary animal studies. Using eighteenth-century literature, culture, and intellectual discourse as a starting point and then sampling related materials in the Anglo-American tradition from the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, we will define these theoretical scenarios, and evaluate the broader impact of approaches to the other-than-human in literary theory and in formal critique. Texts (and selections): Newton, Opticks; Defoe, Robinson Crusoe; Hume, Treatise of Human Nature; Voltaire, Candide; Auster, Timbuktu; Heise, Imagining Extinction; Kohn, How Forests Think; Braidotti, The Posthuman.

class: ENGL 6382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.

class: ENGL 6410
class title: Women Writers in North America, 1830-1930
description: Not quite a survey, this course investigates several terms that its title might obscure. Drawing on theoretical constructions of gender, genre, race, and history, the course considers the historical conditions for women writers as they produce works under conditions of necessity, pleasure, politics, and polemical insistence. We will read poetry, short stories, letters, and novels. Authors will include Harriet Prescott Spofford, Harriet Wilson, Harriet Jacobs, and Harriet Beecher Stowe as well as Emily Dickinson, Alice and Phoebe Cary, Sui Sin Far, Sarah Winnemucca, Maria Ruiz de Burton, Edith Wharton, Nella Larsen, and Zora Neale Hurston.

class: ENGL 6554
class title: Modernist Fiction and the Erotics of Style
description: "I am interested in language because it wounds or seduces me," the critic Roland Barthes once wrote. How do we take pleasure in a text, even when it appears to betray us? How do we speak of the erotics of style beyond the mere thematic interpretation of sexual representation? Has such an erotics even been written yet? To explore a methodology for contemplating this elusive embrace between the aesthetic and the erotic, we will consider influential works of psychoanalytic, deconstructive, feminist, and queer theory alongside a survey of great modernist novelists whose innovative experiments in prose style have proved most sensual and most challenging, among them Oscar Wilde, Henry James, Gertrude Stein, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Ronald Firbank, and Djuna Barnes.

class: ENGL 6560
class title: Politics and Joy in Black Women's Writing
description: This course will look at how Black women writers negotiated enslavement, Reconstruction, and Jim Crow era segregation while also managing to find avenues of joy, escapism, and a certain kind of freedom through art-making. In addition to reading primary texts by Phillis Wheatley, Hannah Bond, Jessie Redmon Fauset, and others we will also look at critical and theoretical work by Hortense Spillers, Saidiyah Hartman, Barbara Fields, and Karen Fields.

class: ENGL 6663
class title: Latinx Field Formations and The Politics of Transformative Study
description: How do social justice and decolonial movements transform our habits of study and our systems of valuation? This course will examine the emergence of Latinx Studies as a field, paying careful attention to the creative arts (theater, literature, dance, film, art, music) in tension with the challenges emerging alongside social movements including school desegregation, environmental justice, anticarceral, immigrant and voting rights struggles. Not only will our work consider how performative practices have been central to such struggles, but we will also examine how the study of these practices became a discipline in the academy (just as they were disciplined by it).  We will study major literary texts as well as other creative forms to understand how a sutured Latinidad emerged.

class: ENGL 6694
class title: Political Violence in Contemporary Fiction: Silence as Compassion or Complicity
description: This course examines contemporary works of fiction that depict episodes of political violence between WWII and today. During this period, there have been 344 conflicts that have killed 500 or more people, but the public attention they receive varies tremendously. New novels and stories disclose and challenge silences surrounding events neglected in global public memory. What role can these works play in altering the kinds of stories heard within and beyond the university? Which voices do they portray as empowered or neglected? How can silence around violence be both compassionate and complicit? What are the ethics of storytelling related to different forms of silence, and what does it mean to read in a way that is compassionate or complicitly silent?

class: ENGL 6791
class title: Acoustic Horizons
description: The course will explore the philosophy, psychoanalysis, and politics of sound along the artistic interface of cinema, video, performance, and new media art.  From analysis of synchronization of sound and image in the talking movie to its discruption in experimental music, video, new media and sound art, we will consider the prominence of sound and noise as carriers of gender, ethnic and cultural difference.  We also will explore the theory of sound, from tracts on futurism, feminism, new music, and sampling, to more recent acoustic applications of eco-theory in which sound merges with discourses of water and environment.  In addition to studying a wide range of artistic production in audio, sound, new media, and screen arts, we will discuss the dialogical impact of theoretical discussions of sound in psychoanalysis and aesthetics, as well as the phenomenal growth of digital acoustic horizons in the Pacific Rim.

class: ENGL 7800
class title: MFA Seminar: Poetry
description: The MFA poetry seminar is a required course for MFA poetry students.

class: ENGL 7801
class title: MFA Seminar: Fiction
description: The MFA fiction seminar is a required course for all MFA fiction students.

class: ENGL 7850
class title: Reading for Writers
description: In general, Reading for Writers examines literary works through the eyes of a writer, focusing on the craft of literature. While the class is geared toward MFA students, all graduate students are welcome to enroll. Topics vary with each section and semester. For descriptions, please consult the class roster.

class: ENGL 7880
class title: Literary Small Publishing
description: In this course, we'll build the skills necessary to edit and publish a small magazine and will learn how to produce the kind of popular critical writing that drives literary conversation outside of academia. We'll talk about taste, craft, and critical etiquette, and will end the semester having written, peer-reviewed, and published online a small suite of incidental pieces: one book review, one interview with a writer, and one essay on some aspect of the craft of writing.

class: ENGL 7910
class title: Article Writing Seminar
description: This workshop will take students through the process of writing and revising an academic article. We will begin by introducing the genre of the article and its key components (central claims, methodological approach, scholarly intervention, readings). The seminar will address the foundations of writing and the academic publishing landscape alongside a variety of landmark articles across subdisciplines and journals. It will, however, primarily function as a workshop, providing in-depth feedback and allowing students to leave the course with a polished article draft and the resources for its submission.

class: ENGL 7940
class title: Directed Study
description: This course gives students the opportunity to work with a selected instructor to pursue special interests or research not treated in regularly scheduled courses. After getting permission of the instructor, students should contact the department to request access to an instructor's section. Enrolled students are required to provide the department with a course description and/or syllabus along with the instructor's approval by the end of the first week of classes.

class: ENGL 7950
class title: Group Study
description: This course should be used for an independent study in which a small group of students works with one member of the graduate faculty. After getting permission of the instructor, students should contact the department to request access to an instructor's section. Enrolled students are required to provide the department with a course description and/or syllabus along with the instructor's approval by the end of the first week of classes.

class: ENGL 7960
class title: Placement Seminar
description: This seminar will help prepare graduate students for the academic job market. Though students will study sample materials from successful job applicants, much of the seminar will function as a workshop, providing them with in-depth feedback on multiple drafts of their job materials. Interview skills will be practiced in every seminar meeting. The seminar meetings will be supplemented with individual conferences with the placement mentor, and students should also share copies of their job materials with their dissertation committees.

class: ENGRC 3023
class title: Communication Intensive Opportunity: Practicum in Technical Writing
description: One-credit attachment to an existing engineering course that is not one of the officially designated W-I courses. It may be taken more than once, with different courses by permission of a particular engineering faculty member.

class: ENGRC 3025
class title: Creating and Communicating Your Digital Professionalism
description: Senior-level course focused on creating and communicating an online professional identity. The key learning outcome is to enable students to develop digital professionalism, defined as a multimodal communicative competence honed through the practice of creating, critiquing, and reflecting upon digital artifacts they use to build and present their professional and public identities. The course will focus students' attention on (i) Production: What are the implications of using a particular platform to create a professional self? (ii) Representation: What tools do they need to analyze their own multimodal presentation of their professional selves? (iii) Circulation: What are the effects of having online representations of themselves as professionals? and (iv) Audience: What are their expectations about who will be viewing/interpreting those professional selves and for what purpose?
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completed internship, professional experience, or significant undergraduate research; familiarity with HTML, CSS, and/or website development.

class: ENGRC 3026
class title: Engineering Presentations and Expert Presence
description: As a technical contributor or expert, engineers are called on frequently to give presentations (proposals, technical updates, progress reporting, client pitches, engineering advancements/information, and more). However, many presenters have not had specific training about planning, preparing, honing, executing, documenting, and archiving their presentation work; this course addresses those skills. As well, issues of cross-cultural communication, institutional need, audience assessment, and personal presence will be covered. Students should expect to align their work and presentations in this class with a major project in their field. Students will give both individual and team talks.
outcome: Oral Communication/Presentations: Plan, devise, formulate, design, and report information via professional presentations for various technical and stakeholder needs., Written Communication: Identify, research, negotiate, and compose various texts to further a technical or engineering effort with consideration to context and audience; use writing and planning skills to support presentation work both for the talk itself and as archival legacy documentation., Visual and Multimodal Communication: Visualize, illustrate, and appropriately caption visuals; discriminate between methodologies for creating visuals other multimodal artifacts to support the technical endeavor; create visuals and multimodal artifacts that are accessible., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two First-Year Writing Seminars and major affiliation.

class: ENGRC 3027
class title: Cross-cultural Communications and Ethics in the Workplace
description: Engineering industries increasingly demand individual contributors and teams that can communicate and collaborate with professionals across diverse cultures. The purpose of this course is to increase students' cultural awareness and sensitivity and develop intercultural competence while engaging positively in technical work. Course topics will focus on engineering communication and practices of human-centered design, thereby exposing cultural dimensions and ethical consequences of human-engineered artifacts. Through various kinds of genre writing practice and a major teamwork project, students are expected to improve written, oral, visual and interpersonal communication skills as well.
outcome: Demonstrate cultural awareness and sensitivity, adapt themselves to audiences from other cultures in both written, visual, and oral communication., Demonstrate ethical awareness in technology design/development and create accessible communication artifacts., Effectively collaborate with teammates and professionally communicate with clients; increase presentation skills, including creating effective slides and professionally presenting information to clients., Effectively compose various kinds of workplace documents to further a technical or engineering effort with consideration to context and audience, especially different cultural contexts and audiences from other cultures., Visualize, illustrate, and appropriately caption visuals; create accessible multimodal artifacts to support the technical endeavor., Design and conduct engineering and cross-cultural communication research for professional goals; access library databases and use sources accurately., 

class: ENGRC 3340
class title: Independent Study in Engineering Communications
description: Members of the ECP occasionally give independent (also called "directed") studies in engineering communications, typically with students who are ready for advanced work in technical communication. A student doing a directed study works one-on-one with an ECP instructor to pursue an aspect of professional communications in more depth than is possible in the ECP's regular courses. Various types of projects are possible, e.g., studying forms of technical documentation, creating user manuals, analyzing and producing technical visuals, reading and writing about problems in engineering performance, and communicating about technical topics for the public.

class: ENGRC 3341
class title: Guided Fieldwork for Engineering Communications
description: Provides individual students opportunity to pursue guided fieldwork in their major, and includes significant engineering communication opportunities. Success in the course relies on commitment from both the student and their College of Engineering mentoring faculty selected from within their major. This course requires students to go above and beyond regular coursework expectations and can take the form of undergraduate research, independent study, an honors project, or even an outreach activity.
outcome: Oral Communication/Presentations: plan, devise, formulate, design, and report information via professional presentations for various technical and stakeholder needs., Written Communication: identify, research, negotiate, and compose various texts to further a technical or engineering effort with consideration to context and audience; use writing and planning skills to support presentation work both for the talk itself and as archival legacy documentation., Visual and Multimodal Communication: visualize, illustrate, and appropriately caption visuals; discriminate between methodologies for creating visuals other multimodal artifacts to support the technical endeavor; create visuals and multimodal artifacts that are accessible. Examples may include conference-style posters, informative videos, or other., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two (2) First-Year Writing Seminars and major affiliation.

class: ENGRC 3500
class title: Engineering Communications
description: Prepares students for important communication activities. Students will communicate using various types of written communication which may include emails, memos, problem analyses, proposals, progress reports, or other genres. Students will give oral presentations and incorporate graphics in their oral and written work. Students learn how to communicate specialized information to different audiences (e.g., technical and nontechnical audiences, colleagues and clients, peers and supervisors, and in-house departments), work in teams, and address organizational and ethical issues including using GenAI, racism, equity, inclusiveness, and accessibility. The course material is drawn from professional contexts, principally engineering, and it generates lively discussion.
distribution categories: (CE-EN)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two (2) First-Year Writing Seminars and major affiliation.

class: ENGRC 3700
class title: Communications Consulting for Engineers
description: Upon successful completion of this course students agree to become teaching assistants (TAs) in the Spring 2023 semester for ENGRC 3120. Teaching assistants will support an Engineering Communications Program faculty member in creating learning materials and holding regular meetings with student teams to consult on their communication work.
outcome: Students will learn  Engineering communications concepts, theories, and pedagogy., Students will  learn consulting practices, including team consultations., Students will learn specialist and generalist tutoring approaches., 
distribution categories: (CE-EN)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3120.

class: ENGRC 4590
class title: Communications for Physical Design in Biological Engineering
description: This course prepares students for important biological engineering communication activities, e.g., introduction to science/biological engineering communication, laboratory notebooks, presentations (proposal, progress final), visuals and captions, technical report and teamwork.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BEE 4590.

class: ENGRD 2020
class title: Statics and Mechanics of Solids
description: This course presents the methods for analyzing deformable structures in equilibrium. It is fundamental to mechanical analysis and design and is the basis for many advanced courses and professions in mechanical, civil, materials, biomedical and biological engineering.
outcome: Students will be able to draw complete and correct free body diagrams., Students will be able to apply the principle of equilibrium to calculate external and internal forces in simple, statically determinant mechanical systems, including simple shear and bending moment distributions., Students will be able to use key terminology related to stress, strain, deformation and elasticity along with analyzing the stress, strain and deformation in bars subject to axial, bending and torsional loads., Students will be able to use the principles of elasticity and equilibrium to solve for stresses in simple statically indeterminate systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112. Corequisite: MATH 1920. 

class: ENGRD 2100
class title: Introduction to Circuits for Electrical and Computer Engineers
description: This course is an introduction to electronic circuits. We start with the basic quantities used to characterize circuit operation (like current, voltage, and power) and then enforce several physical laws to form the basis of our approach to circuit analysis. Networks comprising passive circuit elements such as resistors, inductors, and capacitors will be examined under constant dc, transient, and sinusoidal steady-state conditions. Active components including transistors and Op-Amps will be introduced and used to build simple amplifiers and switching power converters. Many of these ideas will be unified mathematically through the use of Laplace transforms and associated transfer functions. In the lab part of the course, we will learn how to use modern instruments to test circuits, and explore the concepts from lecture applied to real circuits. Finally, we will develop some simple modeling software in MATLAB to numerically predict the results from analysis and experiment.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 or PHYS 1112. Corequisite: MATH 2930 or PHYS 2213.

class: ENGRD 2110
class title: Object-Oriented Programming and Data Structures
description: Intermediate programming in a high-level language and introduction to software engineering. Topics include object-oriented programming (objects, classes, subtypes, encapsulation, polymorphism), program correctness (specifications, invariants, testing), algorithm analysis (asymptotic complexity, big "O" notation), recursion, data structures (lists, trees, stacks, queues, heaps, hash tables, graphs), iteration and searching/sorting, graph algorithms, and concurrent and event-driven programming (graphical user interfaces, synchronization). Java is the principal programming language.
outcome: Employ recursion and object-oriented programming concepts (e.g., classes, interfaces, polymorphism, inheritance) to solve computational problems., Design, implement, and verify nontrivial Java programs (roughly 1000 lines of code), starting from an English language specification, leveraging features like encapsulation and unit tests to improve maintainability., Build and modify event-driven graphical user interfaces (GUIs) expressed in Java., Analyze the asymptotic complexity of algorithms and programs to evaluate their running times and memory requirements., Implement basic data structures taught in the course (linked lists, binary search trees, heaps, hash tables, adjacency lists) and be able to use them in programs., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or equivalent course in Java or C++.

class: ENGRD 2112
class title: Object-Oriented Design and Data Structures - Honors
description: Intermediate software design and introduction to key computer science ideas. Topics are similar to those in CS 2110 but are covered in greater depth, with more challenging assignments. Topics include object-oriented programming, program structure and organization, program reasoning using specifications and invariants, recursion, design patterns, concurrent programming, graphical user interfaces, data structures as in CS 2110, sorting and graph algorithms, asymptotic complexity, and simple algorithm analysis. Java is the principal programming language.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or equivalent course in Java or C++, or permission of the instructor.

class: ENGRD 2190
class title: Chemical Process Design and Analysis
description: Engineering problems involving material and energy balances. Batch and continuous reactive systems in the steady and unsteady states. Introduction to phase equilibria for multicomponent systems. Examples drawn from a variety of chemical and biomolecular processes.
outcome: Basic engineering calculations: convert units quickly and accurately; define, calculate and estimate properties of process materials such as fluid density, concentrations, pressure, etc., Material and energy balance calculations: draw and label process flowsheets from verbal descriptions of processes; carry-out degree-of-freedom analyses; write and solve mass and energy balance equations for single unit and multiple unit processes with and without chemical reaction., Physical chemistry: perform pressure-volume-temperature calculations for ideal and nonideal gases; perform vapor-liquid equilibrium calculations for systems containing one condensable component and for ideal multicomponent solutions; calculate internal energy and enthalpy changes for process fluids undergoing specified changes in temperature, pressure, phase, and chemical compositions; incorporate such calculations into mass and energy balance problems., Other: explain the difference between transient and steady-state processes and make simple mass and energy balance calculations for transient processes; work effectively in teams and know your classmates; produce a written report on the design and analysis of a large scale process addressing a technical problem of national importance., 

class: ENGRD 2202
class title: Biomedical Transport Phenomena
description: Quantitative analysis of transport phenomena in physiological systems, including fluid mechanics and mass transfer. Fluid statics, mass and momentum conservation, laminar and turbulent flow, microscale and macroscale analytical methods, mass transport with biochemical reactions, applications to transport in tissue and organs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 2930 or equivalent.

class: ENGRD 2210
class title: Thermodynamics
description: Presents the definitions, concepts, and laws of thermodynamics. Topics include the first and second laws, thermodynamic property relationships, and applications to vapor and gas power systems, refrigeration, and heat pump systems. Examples and problems are related to contemporary aspects of energy and power generation and to broader environmental issues.
outcome: Students will be able to choose an appropriate system and identify interactions between system and surroundings., Students will be able to obtain values of thermodynamic properties for a pure substance in a given state, using tables, relations for incompressible substances, and relations for gases., Students will be able to apply energy and entropy balances in the control mass (closed system) and control volume formulations to the analysis of devices and cycles., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and PHYS 1112.

class: ENGRD 2250
class title: The Earth System
description: EAS 2250 provides a broad math-, physics-, and chemistry-based introduction to the earth sciences, including geology, paleontology, oceanography, and atmospheric science. Topics covered include formation of the Earth, the chemistry and physics of the Earth's interior, plate tectonics, weathering and erosion, soil development, stream and groundwater flow, volcanism and crustal deformation, the evolution of life, ocean and atmospheric structure, circulation and heat transport, ocean waves and tides, generation of storms, seawater chemistry, mineral and energy resources, and climate change.
outcome: Describe and use the scientific process; i.e. explain how theories are built upon observations and how both are tested and revised. Be able to give Earth-related examples of this process., Explain how fundamental physical, chemical, and biological principles shape the planet Earth, providing concrete examples., Explain the place of the Earth in the cosmos: specifically how and when it formed, and how it continues to evolve through processes such as plate tectonics, erosion and sedimentation, etc. Describe the key observations that have led scientists to this present theory of Earth., Describe the history of life on Earth and explain how natural selection and evolution has led to the current diversity of organisms on Earth, including man. Explain how life has affected and changed the Earth., Be able to participate knowledgeably and intelligently in discussions of public policy related to earth science, particularly with respect to hazards, such as earthquakes and volcanoes, and resources such as water, mineral deposits, hydrocarbons, etc.; and the impact of man's activities on the Earth, particularly including climate change., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or MATH 1910.

class: ENGRD 2300
class title: Digital Logic and Computer Organization
description: This course provides an introduction to the design and implementation of digital circuits and microprocessors. Topics include transistor network design, Boolean algebra, combinational circuits, sequential circuits, finite state machine design, processor pipelines, and memory hierarchy. Design methodology using both discrete components and hardware description languages is covered in the laboratory portion of the course.
outcome: Understand Boolean logic and state machines as theoretical foundations of digital systems., Be able to conceive, analyze, design, and build combinational and sequential digital logic solutions to everyday problems., Comprehend the basic structure and functionality of ROM and RAM memories., Understand the basic structure and functionality of central processing units, and build a simple one using FPGAs., Understand the structure and operation of memory hierarchies and input/output systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1110 or CS 1112.

class: ENGRD 2510
class title: Engineering Processes for Environmental Sustainability
description: Students will quantitatively understand and analyze environmental issues such as: the impact of industrial contaminants and excess nutrients on water quality; the global carbon cycle; improving global access to clean water. This course integrates principles from chemistry, biology, math and engineering to understand and solve real-world problems that impact three major environmental compartments: air, water, and soil. Students will solve mass and energy balances beginning with simple, closed systems, then progress through reactive, open systems to describe environmental fate and transport of pollutants, natural environmental cycles and remediation scenarios. Students will be exposed to technical and lay material from interdisciplinary sources to understand the environmental externalities – social, political, economic and cultural – that must be considered when proposing solutions to today's most pressing environmental issues. BE and EnvE students must complete either BEE 2510 or BEE 2600 according to their academic plan. Students who complete both BEE 2510 and BEE 2600 receive engineering credit toward their degree for only one of these courses.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will improve their ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions (ABET 6)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or CHEM 2090 or AP Chem. Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930.

class: ENGRD 2600
class title: Principles of Biological Engineering
description: Focuses on the integration of biological principles with engineering, math, and physical principles. Students learn how to formulate equations for biological systems in class and practice in homework sets. Topics range from molecular principles of reaction kinetics and molecular binding events to macroscopic applications such as energy and mass balances of bioprocessing and engineering design of implantable sensors. Students will also experience scientific literature searches as related to the biological engineering topics, and critical analysis and evaluation of relevant information sources. BEE students must complete either BEE 2510 or BEE 2600 according to their academic plan. BEE students who complete both BEE 2510 and BEE 2600 receive engineering credit for only one of these courses.
outcome: Students will improve their ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics (ABET 1)., Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will display an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences (ABET 3)., Students will demonstrate an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed judgements which consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts (ABET 4)., Students will demonstrate an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives (ABET 5)., Students will improve their ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions (ABET 6)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., Students will improve their capacity to integrate modern biology with engineering principles (ABET-BE)., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 2930, two semesters of core biology major classes (BIOMG 1350, BIOG 1440, BIOG 1445 or BIOEE 1610) plus BIOG 1500 or equivalent.

class: ENGRD 2610
class title: Mechanical Properties of Materials: From Nanodevices to Superstructures
description: Examines the mechanical properties of materials (e.g., strength, stiffness, toughness, ductility) and their physical origins. Explores the relationship of the elastic, plastic, and fracture behavior to microscopic structure in metals, ceramics, polymers, and composite materials. Discusses effects of time and temperature on materials properties. Emphasizes considerations for design and optimal performance of materials and engineered objects.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112.

class: ENGRD 2700
class title: Eng Probability and Statistics: Modeling and Data Science
description: Gives students a working knowledge of basic probability and statistics and their application to engineering. Includes computer analysis of data and simulation. Topics include random variables, probability distributions, expectation, estimation, testing, experimental design, quality control, and regression.
outcome: Understand the breadth of decision situations with uncertainty that arise in engineering, industry, and society., Develop the skills needed for extracting information from data in real-world decision situations., Learn methods of probability modeling and data analysis., Build familiarity with current software used for statistical inference and data analysis., 
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910, MATH 1920.

class: ENGRD 2720
class title: Data Science for Engineers
description: An introduction to data science for engineers. The data science workflow: acquisition and cleansing, exploration and modeling, prediction and decision making, visualization and presentation. Tools for data science including numerical optimization, the Discrete Fourier Transform, Principal Component Analysis, and probability with a focus on statistical inference and correlation methods. Techniques for different steps in the workflow including outlier detection, filtering, regression, classification, and techniques for avoiding overfitting. Methods for combining domain-agnostic data analysis tools with the types of domain-specific knowledge that are common in engineering. Ethical considerations. Optional topics include classification via neural networks, outlier detection, and Markov chains. Programming projects in Python.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and either CS 1110 or CS 1112.

class: ENGRG 1002
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: ENGRD 2020
description: Peer-facilitated group sessions focused on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in ENGRD 2020/MAE 2020.
outcome: Deepen understanding of material and process in learning communities where students are a subset of a larger core engineering course., Enhance student understanding beyond the level of course instruction, encouraging application of course content to novel and creative problems., Improve affective and cognitive learning outcomes for students in core engineering courses., Improve students' collaboration skills to accomplish shared learning goals., 

class: ENGRG 1009
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CHEM 2090
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CHEM 2090. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CHEM 2090.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CHEM 2090.

class: ENGRG 1010
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 1110
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 1110. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 1110.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 1110.

class: ENGRG 1011
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 2110
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 2110. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 2110.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 2110.

class: ENGRG 1012
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 1112
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 1112 . Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 1112.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 1112.

class: ENGRG 1028
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 2800
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 2800. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 2800.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 2800.

class: ENGRG 1031
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 3110
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 3110. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 3110.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 3110.

class: ENGRG 1034
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: CS 3410
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for CS 3410. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in CS 3410.
outcome: Deepen understanding of material and process in learning communities where students are a subset of a larger core engineering or CS course., Enhance student understanding beyond the level of course instruction, encouraging application of course content to novel and creative problems., Improve affective and cognitive learning outcomes for students in core engineering and CS courses., Improve students' collaboration skills to accomplish shared learning goals., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CS 3410.

class: ENGRG 1050
class title: Engineering Seminar
description: First-year engineering students meet in groups weekly with their faculty advisors. Discussions may include the engineering curriculum and student programs, what engineers do, the character of engineering careers, active research areas in the college and in engineering in general, and study and examination skills useful for engineering students. Groups may visit campus academic, engineering, and research facilities.

class: ENGRG 1091
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 1910
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 1910. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 1910.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 1910.

class: ENGRG 1092
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 1920
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 1920. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 1920.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 1920.

class: ENGRG 1093
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 2930
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 2930. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 2930.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 2930.

class: ENGRG 1094
class title: AEW Collaborative Workshop: MATH 2940
description: Academic Excellence Workshop for MATH 2940. Weekly two-hour collaborative learning sessions. Peer-facilitated group works on problems at or above the level of course material, designed to enhance understanding of core concepts in MATH 2940.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 2940.

class: ENGRG 1152
class title: Coaching and Mentoring for Professional and Student Success
description: This class will help you engineer your life to get the most out of your undergraduate experience now while building foundational professional skills for the future. Meetings with an assigned engineering alumni mentor-coach will expand your network and give you a window into the non-technical aspects of the practice of engineering. Class sessions provide tools for strategic decision-making about the many opportunities you have at Cornell to develop teamwork, leadership, and related skills. Through COMPASS, you will gain a clear sense of your values, interests, strengths, and areas for development as well as a plan for the remainder of your Cornell experience.
outcome: Identify non-technical skills required of professional engineers and create a 2- to 3-year plan to develop them through curricular and co-curricular activities., Apply various decision tools to make intentional choices about which personal and professional activities to commit to., Develop professional skills of networking, timeliness, being accountable, and developing positive mentoring relationships., Demonstrate effective professional writing and self-presentation skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRG 1050 or permission of instructor.

class: ENGRG 1400
class title: Engineering Project Team Onboarding
description: Students who are joining an Engineering Project Team for the first time will be introduced to the program and to information and skills needed for success as a project team member.  Topics will include a broad orientation to the Engineering Project Teams, safety, communication, giving and accepting feedback, and expectations for culture and behavior.  Students may enroll concurrently with one or two credits of additional team-specific project team coursework. The course is intended for and required of all new project team members. 
outcome: Students will demonstrate an understanding of the project team program, guidelines and policies, expectations, and requirements., Students will be able to complete project team work safely and will be able to identify what creates a safe versus unsafe working environment., Students will learn skills to effectively work in teams, and how to identify their own strengths and those of their teammates., 

class: ENGRG 3400
class title: Engineering Student Project Teams
description: Intended for student members of Engineering Student Project Teams. Project Team students work in an applied setting that fosters knowledge transfer from the classroom to practice and development of professional skills necessary to work in multidisciplinary teams. Students will regularly attend team meetings as well as work on their own. An individual final deliverable on the project is required of each student.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRG 1400.

class: ENGRG 3605
class title: Ethics of Computing and Artificial Intelligence Technologies
outcome: Students will be able to identify and describe a variety of social, ethical, and political issues that arise distinctively from the use and development of computing technologies., Students will be able to use normative theories from the humanities and social sciences to make sense of ethical issues in computing., Students will be able to reason about, critique, defend, and develop specific opinions on social, ethical, and political issues that arise in connection to computing technologies., Students will have improved their written and oral communication skills and academic research skills., 

class: ENGRG 3900
class title: Foundations of Engineering Leadership
description: This is the first of two required classes in the Engineering Leadership Certification Program. The focus is on the "self" and "team" competencies covered in the certification program. Students gain knowledge about their own strengths, values, purpose, goals, and derailers. Further topics include project management basics, presentation skills, communication and team dynamics. Working from this foundation, students propose and form teams to enact a Leadership Project that has meaning and impact. Note that this class includes two required weekend retreats in addition to the regularly scheduled class: one during the first week of classes in January and the other in April.

class: ENGRG 4400
class title: Engineering Student Project Team Leadership
description: This skills-based, experiential learning course will use students' project team experiences as a vehicle to learn about, practice, and refine critical leadership skills. Students will have access to one on one and small group coaching throughout their enrollment in the course.
outcome: Collaborate with fellow student project team leads to foster teamwork, cooperation, collaboration, and knowledge sharing, to enhance learning and empower peers and teammates, through participation in meetings, workshops, and activities each semester., Apply and integrate programmatic policies, expectations, and resources to team-specific project management, priorities, and initiatives, to create consistency and equity across and between teams, through engagement in core content offered each semester., Demonstrate growth and proficiency in one advanced leadership topic per semester., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRG 1400, ENGRG 3400.

class: ENGRG 4800
class title: Eng Leader Skill Clinic: Listening Skills
description: LSC: Listening Skills for Leaders teaches the foundational skill of transformational leadership. You'll learn a simple method for getting better information, creating empathy, and building better relationships through intentional listening. During the action interval, you'll apply these skills in real-world situations and reflect on your experience. The second and final workshop is dedicated to sharing your 'lessons learned' and forming a plan to continue to develop leader listening skills.

class: ENGRG 4835
class title: Eng Leader Skill Clinic: Receiving Feedback
description: Engineering Leadership Skills Clinics are action-oriented, short-term classes that build your confidence and capabilities in engineering teamwork and leadership. Each Clinic comprises two interactive workshops separated by an Action Interval in which you will experiment with new skills and analyze the results. The time commitment is about ten hours over three weeks.

class: ENGRG 4850
class title: Engineering Leadership Skills Clinics: Time Management for Leaders
description: Time Management will teach you how to manage your time well, by shifting your mindset around how you spend your time and make decisions. We'll explore strategies for setting priorities, overcoming procrastination, and balancing competing demands. During the action intervals you will apply these skills in real-world situations and reflect on your experience. The final workshop is dedicated to sharing your 'lessons learned' and setting goals for continued experimentation and development.
outcome: Describe and apply the four components of good time management., Demonstrate proficiency in analyzing commitments using the Eisenhower Matrix., 

class: ENGRG 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching and Learning in Engineering: AEW Facilitation
description: This course provides selected undergraduate students with hands-on teaching experience by involving them in planning and leading Academic Excellence Workshop (AEW) courses. AEW facilitators work closely with a co-facilitator and communicate weekly with the associated course team to plan and deliver their sessions. Throughout the semester, facilitators receive thorough training on teaching math, chemistry, computer science, or engineering. They will read and discuss articles and videos, reflect on their own experiences, and engage in activities to improve their teaching and learning skills. The training covers topics such as building community, creating inclusion, how people learn, asking effective questions, structuring collaboration, and various student-centered teaching strategies. Trainings also include a focus on developing facilitators as leaders and professionals.
outcome: Implement strategies that create an inclusive learning environment, Create and maintain a student-centered, active learning environment, Implement improvements and reflect on practices throughout the semester in which you are facilitating learning, Describe the role of facilitator as leaders and mentors amongst peers, Demonstrate teamwork and leadership skills with co-facilitator, 

class: ENGRG 4990
class title: Teaching in Engineering Leadership
description: Teaching assistant responsibilities include class preparation, grading, and assisting students with class logistics. Regular class duties includes monitoring student class participation and facilitating exercises and discussions. Teaching assistants will help facilitate two outside-of-class retreats in the spring semester.

class: ENGRG 4998
class title: Engineering Practical Training
description: This independent study course offers engineering students an opportunity to reflect on professional and personal growth, challenges, and opportunities resulting from a recent internship in the USA (Curricular Practical Training, CPT). Typically, these internships take place in the summer and students, in the semester they return to campus, write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of their  major. The value of the course is in the reflection on expectations, successes, challenges and skills and knowledge gained during the internship in the United States.
outcome: Examine the ways in which the internship experience met, exceeded, or did not meet the students' expectations at the outset. This includes the experience alignment with the employer's description as well as the students personal and professional set of values and ethics., Identify knowledge, skills, or other experiences (in the conceptual, technical and social realm) that would be beneficial going forward in preparation for successful future in a chosen career based on the internship experience., Weigh the benefits and the challenges of working in an environment that is culturally unfamiliar (an international setting)., Synthesize the component reflections on strengths, challenges, expectations, and personal values into an exploration of potential career paths going forward., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: intended for undergraduates in engineering majors who require work authorization for an employer other than Cornell.

class: ENGRG 5350
class title: Career Search and Exploration for Engineers
description: This course delves into the essential elements of career planning and job search strategies. Through interactive discussions and practical exercises, students will identify their strengths, skills, and values, honing their ability to articulate these effectively in professional contexts. They will gain comprehensive insights into the complete job search process, including learning how to craft compelling application materials, cultivate their professional network, communicate with confidence during interviews, and negotiate offers effectively.

class: ENGRG 6780
class title: Teaching Seminar
description: Independent study promoting reflection on teaching styles and experiences for graduate student teaching assistants in the College of Engineering. Participants may be concurrently fulfilling a TA assignment or must have done so in the past. Requirements include participation and completion of the College of Engineering's TA Development Program. This course is designed to provide Cornell Engineering TAs with the opportunity to process their understanding of teaching and learning through the formulation of questions, concepts, and theories related to their experiences.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: completion of engineering TA development program. 

class: ENGRI 1100
class title: Lasers and Photonics
description: Lasers have had an enormous impact on communications, medicine, remote sensing, and material processing. This course reviews the properties of light that are essential to understanding the underlying principles of lasers and these photonic technologies. There also is a strong, hands-on laboratory component in which the students build and operate a nitrogen laser and participate in several demonstration experiments such as holography, laser processing of materials, optical tweezers, and fiber optics.

class: ENGRI 1101
class title: Engineering Applications of Operations Research
description: Introduction to the problems and methods of operations research and information engineering focusing on problem areas (including inventory, network design, and resource allocation), the situations in which these problems arise, and several standard solution techniques. In the computational laboratory, students encounter problem simulations and use some standard commercial software packages.
outcome: Understand the breadth of quantitative decision situations that arise in engineering, industry, and society., Develop the skills needed for mathematical modeling of real-world decision situations., Learn fundamental algorithms used to solve such models and the basic mathematical techniques of validating the accuracy and efficiency of these solution methods., Build familiarity with current software used in the computational analysis of these models., 

class: ENGRI 1120
class title: Feast! Chemical and Biomolecular Processes and Products through Food
description: Chemical and biomolecular engineering (ChemE) is central to how we produce, store, and consume food. Learn the principles and practices of chemical engineering through a tasty, hands-on approach to process and product design. This course introduces key concepts and tools in ChemE including process flow diagrams, unit operations, materials and energy balances, phase equilibria, and scale-up. These concepts will be applied in design projects that leverage the use of quantitative methods to support design decisions and balance considerations of product quality, economics, safety, and environmental issues in food products. The course will also explore career pathways in ChemE to understand the wide range of what chemical engineers do in practice.
outcome: Identity, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of engineering, science, and mathematics., Apply engineering design for process and products that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors., Develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use engineering judgement to draw conclusions., Understand current challenges and opportunities for careers in the chemical and biomolecular engineering field., Function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives., Communicate effectively with a range of audiences., 

class: ENGRI 1140
class title: Materials: The Future of Energy
description: New technologies are urgently needed to fulfill projected global energy requirements. Materials properties typically limit the performance that can be achieved in generation, transport, and utilization of energy. This course will explore how new materials can increase our energy supply, facilitate transportation of energy, and decrease consumption. Materials issues in photovoltaic, fuel cell, battery, transportation, lighting, and building technologies will be studied.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of calculus, physics, and chemistry at the high school level.

class: ENGRI 1160
class title: Modern Structures
description: A hands-on introduction to structural engineering, combining classroom demonstrations and presentations with laboratory experience. Students predict hurricane wind forces and design key elements in a high-rise building to resist those forces. Students design a residential wood-deck based on laboratory tests to stretch, compress, shear, split, and bend wooden specimens. Students build brick walls and fail them under simulated hurricane and tornado wind pressures, weld steel bars and pull them apart, and forensically examine the failures. Students use software to analyze and design steel truss bridges, and become proficient at using spreadsheets to perform routine structural calculations and graph the results. Students become familiar with structural concrete by designing, building and testing small-scale reinforced-concrete frames to resist large dynamic forces.
outcome: Apply mechanics principles, learn analysis/design process., Design, build, test model structures., Gain experience with working in teams., 

class: ENGRI 1165
class title: Climate Change and You, the Engineer
description: Our current students are the first generation that will feel the impacts of climate change, and the last generation that can do anything about it. The dual objectives of this course are to inform young pre-professional engineers of the factual science in the nexus of climate change/fossil fuels/renewable energy, and to inspire them to dive into that nexus now, and to begin to do something about untangling it as engineers in practice. In this nexus are key issues for civil engineers: water quality/quantity, emissions, renewable energy supply and structures, civil infrastructure systems engineering, energy economics, sustainability in megacities.

class: ENGRI 1170
class title: Introduction to Mechanical Engineering
description: Introduction to fundamentals of mechanical and aerospace engineering. Students learn and understand topics such as stress and strain, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, automotive engineering, and engineering design and product development. Emphasis is placed on critically examining problem solutions to begin developing engineering intuition. Key components of the class include in-class discussions, homework, laboratory experiments, and a group design project.
outcome: Students will be able to gain a basic understanding of four major areas of the mechanical engineering curriculum: statics, mechanics of materials, fluid mechanics, and thermal sciences., Students will be able to identify a system and its interactions with surroundings; they will use this approach to solve problems in both mechanical and thermal/fluids systems., Students will gain experience with unit conversion, estimation, approximations, and critical thinking., Students will be able to design and build a device (e.g. a small battery-powered car), and perform and document laboratory experiments., Students will be able to become aware of current problems, issues, successes, entrepreneurship opportunities, design trade-offs, and failures in the mechanical and aerospace field., 

class: ENGRI 1190
class title: Biomaterials for the Skeletal System
description: Biomaterials exist at the intersection of biology and engineering. This course explores natural structural materials in the human body, their properties and microstructure, and their synthetic and semi-synthetic replacements. Bones, joints, teeth, tendons, and ligaments are used as examples, with their metal, plastic, and ceramic replacements. Topics covered include mechanical properties, corrosion, toxicity, and biocompatibility. Case studies of design lead to consideration of regulatory approval requirements and legal liability issues.

class: ENGRI 1200
class title: Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanoengineering
description: Lecture/laboratory course designed to introduce first-year students to some of the ideas and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology with stronger emphasis on nanobiotechnology in the spring semester. Topics include nanoscience and nanotechnology-what they are and why they are of interest; atoms and molecules; the solid state; surfaces; behavior of light and material particles when confined to nanoscale dimensions; scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM); microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) design; basic micromachining and chemical synthesis methods, i.e., "top-down" and "bottom-up" approaches to nanofabrication; how to manipulate structures on the nanoscale; physical laws and limits they place on the nanoworld; some far-out ideas. In the laboratory, students construct a simple STM to record atomic resolution images; learn through hands on experience the basic workings of an SEM; use a MEMS computer-aided design software package to model the entire manufacturing sequence of a simple MEMS device, examine the simulated behavior of the device and compare it with real behavior; investigate the optical properties of quantum dots and the unexpected properties of fluids that flow through narrow channels.
outcome: An introductory understanding of quantum mechanics and optics as applied to nanoscience and nanotechnology., Acquired a basic understanding of the tools and fabrication techniques used in nanoscience and nanotechnology., 

class: ENGRI 1220
class title: Earthquake!
description: Explores the science of natural hazards, their societal impacts, and means of mitigation. The focus is on earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami, but hurricanes, severe weather, climate change, landslides, wildfires, and the threat of extinction from a future impact by an extraterrestrial body are also considered.
outcome: Understand the impact of natural hazards on society and its infrastructure., Be able to analyze and interpret geological and geophysical datasets in the context of their role in hazard assessment., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: ENGRI 1310
class title: Introduction to Biomedical Engineering
description: An introduction to the field of biomedical engineering with emphasis on application. Specific applications include biomechanics, bioimaging, bioinstrumentation, biotechnology/nanofabrication, artificial organs, cancer therapy and vaccines.
outcome: To understand the underlying molecular, cellular, physiological and engineering that govern the field of biomedical engineering., 

class: ENGRI 1337
class title: Introduction to Biological Engineering
description: This course introduces first-year students to the field of Biological Engineering (BE). Students will gain an appreciation for basic theory and practice in BE, including material balances, organizing along several length scales, simple experimental design, engineering design methodology, and professional development. Organized as three modules, the course will cover BE at the meso-scale, microscale, and in abiotic (non-living) systems. Field trips to outside engineering firms will be organized to expose students to professional practice in the field.
outcome: Students will demonstrate improved ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration of public health, safety and welfare, as well as relevant global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors (ABET 2)., Students will demonstrate the ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies (ABET 7)., 

class: ENGRI 1620
class title: Visual Imaging in the Electronic Age
description: Interdisciplinary survey course designed to introduce students in the creative arts, science, and engineering to the concepts of 2D and 3D digital pictorial representation and display. It is a concept course that concentrates on "why" rather than "how." Topics include perspective representations, display technology, how television works, bandwidth concepts, digital photography, computer graphics modeling and rendering, color perception, 3D data acquisition, volumetric imaging, and historical precedents, primarily from the art world.

class: ENMGT 3101
class title: Introduction to Python for Engineering
description: Python is one the most popular programming languages for machine learning and data science in various engineering fields. This course rapidly introduces students to programming in Python, focusing on practical tools for data analysis, visualization, and scientific computing. We will learn to work with data, create visualizations, and write simple functions and scripts. We will install and use libraries such as NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas, and create and manage virtual environments. Basic computer science and software engineering concepts will be introduced, however, the focus of this short course is on learning to use Python as a computational tool for engineering and data analysis problems, and creating a foundation for continued learning.
outcome: Install and set up Python and additional computational libraries., Be fluent in the use of expressions, variables, functions, conditional statements, and loops., Use Python to load, analyze, and visualize data., Set up and use virtual environments such as Anaconda to install and manage packages and other tools, for project portability and collaboration., 

class: ENMGT 5101
class title: Introduction to Python for Engineering
description: Python is one the most popular programming languages for machine learning and data science in various engineering fields. This course rapidly introduces students to programming in Python, focusing on practical tools for data analysis, visualization, and scientific computing. We will learn to work with data, create visualizations, and write simple functions and scripts. We will install and use libraries such as NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas, and create and manage virtual environments. Basic computer science and software engineering concepts will be introduced, however, the focus of this short course is on learning to use Python as a computational tool for engineering and data analysis problems, and creating a foundation for continued learning.
outcome: Install and set up Python and additional computational libraries., Be fluent in the use of expressions, variables, functions, conditional statements, and loops., Use Python to load, analyze, and visualize data., Set up and use virtual environments such as Anaconda to install and manage packages and other tools, for project portability and collaboration., 

class: ENMGT 5200
class title: Economics of the Energy Transition
description: In response to the risks posed by global climate change, many states and countries have set emissions reductions goals necessitating a rapid transition toward zero-carbon energy resources. Achieving these goals entails unprecedented investment in civil infrastructure systems combined with large-scale consumer and industry adoption of clean energy solutions. This course will explore the economic challenges and opportunities associated with this transition, with an emphasis on the electric power sector. The course is broken into two halves. The first focuses on the economic viability of individual projects. The second develops system level models and considers interactions between competing energy sources.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700, CEE 3230 or ENMGT 5940.

class: ENMGT 5900
class title: Project Management
description: Core graduate course in project management for people who will manage technical or engineering projects. Focuses both on the "technical" tools of project management (e.g., methods for planning, scheduling, and control) and the "human" side (e.g., forming a project team, managing performance, resolving conflicts), with somewhat greater emphasis on the latter.

class: ENMGT 5910
class title: Engineering Management Project
description: As Engineering Managers, you need to embrace both technical and business skills to tackle complex, sociotechnical challenges, while staying on top of the current pace of technological change. In this Engineering Management project course, we are bridging from your coursework to your role as an engineering manager. To get there, you will practice the tools, themes, and techniques learned in your Engineering Management coursework through the scaffolding of a large project. In CEE 5910, you will work in teams to lead and execute a project in collaboration with an industry partner. You will perform an intensive evaluation of some mixture of the technological and management aspects of a major engineering project or system, conducted with a team of students.

class: ENMGT 5930
class title: Data Analytics
description: Big data is transforming organizations enabling vast improvements in operating efficiency, market identification and segmentation, and many other domains. This course focuses on data collection at all scales, the transformation of that data into knowledge using a variety of data analytic techniques, and the integration of that knowledge into system models for decision-making to better manage organizations. Expertise in R will be developed throughout this course.
outcome: Develop an ability to manage, analyze, and interpret data., Improve the students' ability to identify, formulate, and solve engineering management problems., Develop the skills and techniques necessary to become an effective problem solver., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or equivalent.

class: ENMGT 5950
class title: Construction Planning and Operations
description: Prepares students for responsibilities in overseeing the engineering and management of construction; on time-on budget. Emphasis is placed on the management processes for organizing, planning, and controlling the activities of complex development and construction programs. Students study the contracts for engineering, architecture, and construction; focusing on cost estimation and schedule control, responsibilities and risks, and the relationships among owners, designers, contractors, and suppliers. The potential for project disruption is discussed with special emphasis on dispute resolution methods.
outcome: Evaluate the client's conceptual design providing broad, yet accurate cost appraisals., Have a thorough understanding of the interactions and relationships among the participants within the construction process., Prepare a comprehensive construction cost estimate for a complex building, including general construction, and specialty contractors.  Develop an understanding of how this estimate is developed and carried forward into the bidding and cost control processes., Develop a project schedule from this cost estimate to determine the overall project duration and critical path., Confidentially advise a project owner of project delivery options in an ethical and effective manner., 

class: ENMGT 5960
class title: Negotiations and Contracts for Engineering Managers
description: This dynamic scenario-based course guides you through unique weekly exercises to develop mastery in both planning and executing negotiations of all types. Expand your comfort zone and prowess as you explore negotiation types, skills, strategy and tactics required to excel within STEM professions.
outcome: Effective negotiation planning skills., Fluency in various negation tactics and counter-tactics., Removal of barriers to negotiation success., Understanding of legal processes, instruments and vocabulary required., 

class: ENMGT 5980
class title: Decision Framing and Analytics
description: Framework to structure the way we think about decision situations that are complicated by uncertainty, complexity, and competing objectives. Specific decision analysis concepts and tools, such as decision trees, sensitivity analysis, value of information, and utility theory. Applications to all areas of engineering and life. Includes a group project to analyze a real-world decision.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one of the following: CEE 3040, ENGRD 2700, ILRST 2100, BTRY 3010, AEM 2100 or equivalent.

class: ENMGT 6020
class title: Managing a Culture of Innovation
description: Innovation is not just ideas, but getting ideas to measurable impact for your customers or employees. While the word "innovation" is pervasive throughout engineering and business, developing and managing a culture of innovation has only been mastered by few organizations. In fact, no company has remained on the Dow Jones Industrial Average since its inception. Why? Because implementing a culture of innovation is very difficult and is mired by a lack of understanding of proven innovation strategies, competencies, and tools. In this course, you will learn a systematic approach for developing and managing a culture of innovation. You will learn how to develop an innovation strategy to better meet your organizations goals and customer needs. In addition, we will take time to dive into innovation competencies, such as design thinking, lean start-up, and making, along with learn several innovation tools including hackathons, open innovation challenges and competitions, and corporate venture arms. Lastly, we will discuss how to implement and scale your innovation strategies to deliver impact for your customers and organization.

class: ENMGT 6090
class title: Professional and Leadership Development Seminar
description: Students will identify the goals for their career and engage in several career development support services, such as networking, interviewing, resume and cover letter writing, and negotiation workshops. In addition, they will engage in a leadership development series to help them further build their engineering management and leadership competencies. Through a variety of tools, one-on-one coaching, workshops, events, and other resources, this course will help students develop and practice critical career management skills, along with build their confidence to find a career opportunity best suited to their interests and needs.

class: ENMGT 6092
class title: Overcoming Gender Bias in Engineering Management Leadership
description: In this course, we will explore skills, tools, and mindsets to build leadership skills as engineers with a focus of increasing the number of technical women in leadership.  Topics include understanding and combatting biases, leading with and without authority, addressing conflict, and negotiations.  We will explore various topics using discussion-based lectures, case studies, and invited guest speakers.
outcome: Identify systemic and structural biases setting back women in leadership., Analyze various leadership styles to identify the optimal type for you., Demonstrate command of new skillsets and mindsets to serve as a strong and confident leader., 

class: ENMGT 6095
class title: Special Topics in Engineering Management
description: Individually supervised study of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.

class: ENTOM 2030
class title: Honey Bees: Their Intriguing Biology and Interactions with Humans and More
description: Honeybees have been an object of fascination for mankind since prehistoric times. The complexity of their communal life has intrigued many observers and scientists, and they have long been prized for their honey as well as their beeswax. Honeybees, along with many wild bees are essential coworkers in agriculture because of their pollination services, and they are increasingly seen as important partners for sustainable agriculture that limits the use of pesticides. This course aims to offer an exploration of one of the most amazing life forms we know. Topics covered include chemical ecology, insect physiology, beekeeping, behavioral ecology, pollination biology, sociobiology and Conservation Biology. This course is suitable for non-life sciences students. This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
outcome: Showcase working knowledge of honey bee biology and their place in the evolutionary history of life on planet Earth, their unique anatomy/physiology, behavior, social complexity, chemical world, and environmental adaptations., Explain how Apis mellifera, the Western honey bee, differs from other honey bees, and from the other 20,000 bee species of the world., Analyze the relationships, influence, and impact between honey bees and humans throughout history., Describe the role of honey bees and wild bees in current agricultural systems, evaluate the potential impact of the current decline of populations of many of those bee species on food supply for both humans and livestock, and identify strategies that can mitigate bee decline and lead to sustainable agriculture., Demonstrate self-directed learning in biology by finding and then utilizing credible information sources available to the educated layperson, including articles from the primary scientific literature., Communicate clearly and effectively about controversial issues that relate to insect biology, in written and oral formats., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: ENTOM 2031
class title: Honey Bees: Their Intriguing Biology and Interactions with Humans
description: Honeybees have been an object of fascination for mankind since prehistoric times. The complexity of their communal life has intrigued many observers and scientists, and they have long been prized for their honey as well as their beeswax. Honeybees, along with many wild bees are essential coworkers in agriculture because of their pollination services, and they are increasingly seen as important partners for sustainable agriculture that limits the use of pesticides. This course aims to offer an exploration of one of the most amazing life forms we know. Topics covered include chemical ecology, insect physiology, beekeeping, behavioral ecology, pollination biology, sociobiology and Conservation Biology. This course is suitable for non-life sciences students.
outcome: Showcase working knowledge of honeybee biology and their place in the evolutionary history of life on planet Earth, their unique anatomy/physiology, behavior, social complexity, chemical world, and environmental adaptations., Explain how Apis mellifera, the Western honeybee, differs from other honeybees, and from the other 20,000 bee species of the world., Analyze the relationships, influence, and impact between honeybees and humans throughout history., Describe the role of honeybees and wild bees in current agricultural systems, evaluate the potential impact of the current decline of populations of many of those bee species on food supply for both humans and livestock, and identify strategies that can mitigate bee decline and lead to sustainable agriculture., Demonstrate self-directed learning in biology by finding and then utilizing credible information sources available to the educated layperson, including articles from the primary scientific literature., Communicate clearly and effectively about controversial issues that relate to insect biology, in written and oral formats., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: ENTOM 2120
class title: Insect Biology
description: Introduces the science of entomology, focusing on the systematics, anatomy, physiology, basic and applied ecology, and natural history of insects. Early fall laboratories include field trips to collect and study insects in the natural environment. A personal collection emphasizing ecological, behavioral, and taxonomic categories is a requirement of the laboratory.
outcome: To be able to categorize insects based on basic ecological, behavioral, morphological, physiological, or developmental attributes., Demonstrate phylogenetic "tree thinking.", To be able to name various structures in some insect and compare them with homologous structures in other insects., To be able to present an insect collection of appropriately preserved specimens using a variety of collecting techniques., To be able to evaluate morphological characters and use a dichotomous key., 1. Conduct an ecological sampling field exercise and write a team report
2. Identify insects in lab and collegially compare identifications with other lab members., Sketch anatomical features in personal dissection and lab demonstrations., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: one semester of college biology or permission of instructor.

class: ENTOM 2150
class title: Spider Biology: Life on a Silken Thread
description: Introduction to the fascinating world of spiders and their close kin. Explores behavior, ecology, evolution, and physiology of spiders from a modern perspective. Topics include their unusual reproduction, predatory behavior, unique use of silk, social spiders, and potential use in IPM.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: ENTOM 3150
class title: Spider Biology
description: In-depth introduction to the fascinating world of spiders and their relatives. Students cover current topics in arachnology and developing spider identification skills.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: ENTOM 3350
class title: Naturalist Outreach Practicum
description: An interdisciplinary course on how to do effective scientific outreach. The goals of the course are 1) to train students to speak about science with passion and clarity, 2) for the students to be able to teach science effectively in classrooms, science centers, and in large community outreach events, and 3) to train a generation of civically engaged scientific outreach leaders. Students give presentations in schools. Class size is limited. Students who wish to enroll should read blogs.cornell.edu/naturalistoutreach, please contact the instructor to get an enrollment code. 
outcome: Students will be able to give knowledgeable, well-organized, and dynamic hands-on presentations.  Students learn how to assemble and design illustrative display materials., Students will understand the complexities to design, organize, and manage an outreach event., Students gain experience with the pleasures and realities of teaching children.  Additionally, students interact with teachers to integrate their presentations with the curricular needs of the class., Students learn to synthesize biological concepts and create experiential learning materials for use by others, 
distribution categories: (ORL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one college-level biology course.

class: ENTOM 3360
class title: Naturalist Outreach Continued
description: If you have already taken ENTOM 3350, you can continue to do outreach in the community for credit. Open only to students who have already taken ENTOM 3350.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENTOM 3350.

class: ENTOM 4520
class title: Biology of Disease Vectors
description: This course introduces vector taxonomy, evolution, biology, behavior, and the history of vector-borne disease control, with an emphasis on the USA. Some lectures will feature "expert spotlights": brief conversations with experts in vector control/public health who will join the class live or via recorded video link. Through a series of lectures and projects, you will have a chance to gain knowledge of the latest surveillance approaches, control methods, and challenges for controlling vector-borne diseases. In this course, we intend for you to gain an understanding of arthropod biology, body plans, organ systems, behavior and physiology, infection biology and immunity. You will demonstrate a solid understanding of disease vector evolutionary relationships. Our ultimate goal is for you to learn how to apply knowledge gained from the class in your future roles as entomologists, health experts or public health practitioners.
outcome: Understand fundamental concepts in public health entomology, vector biology, behavior, surveillance, control and public health programming. 
You will be: 
• able to explain mosquito and tick biology, body plans, organ systems, behavior and physiology, infection biology and immunity.
• able to demonstrate knowledge of arthropod behavior, host finding and sensory systems • able to demonstrate knowledge of classification and vector diversity.
• interpret how different environmental and socioeconomic systems impact infectious disease epidemiology.
• integrate the general principles of infectious disease epidemiology and biology to explain infectious disease events and programs.
• able to apply what you have learned from class examples to understand new disease outbreaks and challenges of the future.
• aware of the most up-to-date issues and challenges for vectorborne diseases.
• able to describe who key players are and actions taken in public health emergency responses in the face of vectorborne disease outbreaks., Be knowledgeable about the latest monitoring and control tools and challenges for controlling mosquito and tick vectors. 
You will be: 
• able to explain the latest approaches for mosquito and tick control in detail; and highlight the pros and cons and efficacy of each approach.
• compare and contrast infectious disease prevention and control strategies and systems.
• able to demonstrate your understanding of basic approaches to surveillance of mosquitoes and ticks.
• able to apply your knowledge to develop a suitable monitoring and public health intervention strategy.
• Critique methods of infectious disease diagnostics and detection systems., Apply the knowledge gained from the class in your present or future roles as an informed citizen and in potential careers, including animal and human health professionals, public health practitioners and policy makers. 
You will be: 
• aware of how you may encounter the subjects covered in your own future career and personal life.
• able to communicate important issues related to vector control learned in class to the lay public., 

class: ENTOM 4521
class title: Introduction to Disease Vectors Lab
description: The laboratory complements the required lecture course ENTOM 4520.  Students will learn how to collect and identify arthropods that transmit human pathogens and parasites.  Lab sessions will include a mixture of field trips, hands on demonstrations and independent student work.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENTOM 4520.

class: ENTOM 4550
class title: Insect Ecology
description: You will learn to think like an ecologist by studying the fundamental principles of insect ecology and the types of questions ecologists ask, seeing how ecology can be used to understand and solve environmental problems, and putting this knowledge into action during group activities in the lab and field.
outcome: 1.1 Students will be able to explain the fundamental principles of population and community ecology.
1.2 Students will be to identify what interactions are important for insects.
1.3 Students will learn natural history of local insects., 2.1 Students will be able to interpret data presented in graphs.
2.2 Students will be able to pose their own questions and design and execute experiments to answer these questions. 
2.3 Students will be able to read and interpret the scientific literature.
2.4 Students will be able to use basic statistical methods to interpret their data., 3.1 Students will participate actively in debate with peers using information they research in the primary literature, 4.1 Students will write full reports based on the field and laboratory projects they conduct.
4.2 Students will have opportunities to summarize and evaluate the important factors in insect ecology, 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology or permission of instructor recommended.

class: ENTOM 4970
class title: Individual Study in Entomology
description: A student may, with approval of a faculty advisor, study a problem or topic not covered in a regular course or may undertake tutorial study of an independent nature in an area of interest in Entomology.

class: ENTOM 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching
description: Undergraduate teaching assistance in an entomology course by agreement with the instructor. Participating students assist in teaching a course allied with their education and experience. Students are expected to meet regularly with a discussion or laboratory section, to gain teaching experience, and regularly to discuss teaching objectives, techniques, and subject matter with the professor in charge.

class: ENTOM 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Entomology
description: Students must register using CALS Special Studies form available online.

class: ENTOM 6900
class title: Seminar in Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases
description: Graduate-level discussion of the ecology, epidemiology, genetics, and evolution of infectious disease in animal and plant systems. Weekly discussion of research papers published in the primary scientific literature. Participation in discussion and presentation of at least one paper required for course credit.
outcome: Students will become conversant in general topics in the ecology and evolution of infection and disease across a variety of plant and animal systems—approaches will be both empirical and theoretical., Students will learn how to read and evaluate the peer-reviewed scientific literature., Students will gain experience giving oral presentations as a means for sharing their evaluations of the scientific literature., 

class: ENTOM 7070
class title: Individual Study for Graduate Students
description: Independent or small-group study of special topics of current interest.

class: ENTOM 7090
class title: Teaching Entomology
description: Teaching entomology or for extension training.

class: ENTOM 7640
class title: Plant-Insect Interactions Seminar
description: Group intensive study of current research in plant-insect interactions. Topics vary from semester to semester but include chemical defense, coevolution, insect community structure, population regulation, biocontrol, tritrophic interactions, and mutualism.
outcome: Read, synthesize, and discuss findings from original scientific research in the ecology and evolution of plants interacting with their environment., 

class: ENTOM 7670
class title: Professional Development in Entomology
description: This is a graduate level seminar required of, and limited to, first semester graduate students in the Field of Entomology. The content focusses on professional development skills, including critical reading of scientific literature, oral and written presentation, and grant writing.
outcome: Develop cohesion of the graduate cohort through teamwork and critical, but constructive, peer review., To be able to locate cutting-edge scientific literature relevant to the student's research and critically evaluate the methodology, interpretation of results, and presentation., To be able to present scientific results and analysis orally and in writing in a persuasive and engaging style., To be able to formulate a significant open question in the student's area of research, synthesize the relevant literature, develop a cogent research plan, and write a compelling grant proposal., 

class: ENTOM 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research conducted by M.S. students in the field of entomology with advice and consultation of a major professor who is a member of the field.

class: ENTOM 9900
class title: Doctoral Level Thesis Research
description: Dissertation research conducted by a Ph.D. student in the field of entomology with advice and consultation of a major professor who is a member of the field.

class: ENVS 1101
class title: Understanding Environment and Sustainability
description: This course examines two fundamental questions about biological, chemical and physical processes that influence the biosphere. First, how do humans obtain knowledge about these environmental processes? Second, how can we assess human influences upon these environmental processes? A key conceptual framework for the course is that environmental science provides tools for predicting future states of the earth's environment. Case studies, readings, discussions, writing assignments, and group exercises provide a foundation for understanding predictions about how the biosphere is influenced by human activities.
outcome: Identify and weigh sources of information about environmental resources, and use them to evaluate competing claims about sustainability and environmental management efforts., Explain how the earth's resources support ecosystems and humanity., Evaluate how cultural context and spatial scale influence environmental resource management options., Compare policies and societal norms that influence personal and collective resource use., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: ENVS 1111
class title: Roadmap to Success in Environment and Sustainability
description: This course is for first-year students entering or intending to enter the Environment &amp; Sustainability (E&amp;S) major. The multidisciplinarity of this major may make it seem complex. The purpose of this class is to position you for success with your goals in the major, at Cornell and beyond. Course content will facilitate your course planning, choice of concentration, and help you map out the resources and opportunities Cornell offers. Course activities will help you explore your personal identity and get to know your E&amp;S student cohort.
outcome: Develop a learning community and support network., Describe learning goals in the E&S core curriculum, E&S concentration, E&S capstone and Cornell electives; relate them to your career goals., Identify the resources and services at Cornell that can help you meet your academic and career goals., Engage in self-reflection about how you think and learn, how you interact with others, and how you respond to new information., Identify and acknowledge your social identity, cultural rules and biases and the inherent value of being open to diverse perspectives., 

class: ENVS 2000
class title: Environment and Sustainability Colloquium
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures given by experts, people with different expertise and perspectives who are addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., 

class: ENVS 2010
class title: Discussions of Environment and Sustainability
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures by experts with different perspectives addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern. The small group discussion session allows in-depth engagement with the art-science interface. Building on the possibilities shared by our expert visitors, students in the discussion section will develop their own approach to addressing environmental issues. We will analyze how the ways in which information is shared is as significant as the information itself, and consider "artistic" and "scientific" perspectives as mutually beneficial tools for exploring and communicating our relationship to the environment.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., Mobilize students' own backgrounds and developing expertise to produce a public-facing display that communicates environmental knowledge in creative ways., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENVS 2100
class title: Introductory Field Biology
description: In this course, students are introduced to field identification, natural history, and study of plants, animals, and natural systems. This course emphasizes hands-on interaction with nature, recording of ecological phenomena, and awareness and understanding of the natural environment, including ecological concepts (e.g., ecosystem, community, habitat, and niches).   
outcome: Students will be able to identify and characterize ecosystem types, ecological communities, and habitats in the northeastern region based on key structural features, associated taxa, and the physical environment., Students will be able to identify approximately 200 common taxa of plants and animals in the northeastern region and will understand the natural history of those species and their relationship to the environment., Students will develop an understanding of field research methods and approaches in a variety of ecological disciplines., Students will be able to formulate research questions from field observations, develop a sample design, collect field data, and interpret and discuss their results in relation to research questions., Students will demonstrate equitable collaboration as they design, plan, execute and communicate the results of a field research project., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one introductory college biology course.

class: ENVS 2400
class title: Field Methods in Avian Ecology
description: Students will learn and practice a variety of methodologies used for studying wild birds including banding, census methods (point counts, transects, spot mapping), and behavioral observations. In a 50-minute classroom session each week, students will discuss relevant scientific literature and prepare for the lab session. The weekly field session will be held at various locations and students should be prepared to handle variable weather conditions. Students seeking to conduct independent research in avian ecology are encouraged to enroll. Note that one weekend field trip is required.
outcome: Recognize the birds of the Finger Lakes region by sight and sound., Develop an appreciation for the diversity of life-history strategies pursued by these birds., Perform a variety of field techniques used for studying birds including banding, census methods (point counts, transects, spot mapping), and behavioral observations., Record an appropriately detailed field journal., Develop and test ecological hypotheses through an independent project, to summarize and analyze data, and to present scientific information appropriately in both written and oral form., 

class: ENVS 2500
class title: Environmental and Resource Economics
description: This course uses microeconomics to understand the causes and how to devise solutions to environmental and natural resource problems. Subjects include valuation, benefit-cost analysis, policy design and property rights. The course relies on these concepts to explore major current policy issues such as economic incentives in environmental policy, air and water pollution, depletion of renewable and nonrenewable resources, and global warming. Students are evaluated based on problems sets, short essays, 3 quizzes and 3 prelims.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110.

class: ENVS 3020
class title: Earth Projects
description: Taught by an artist and scientist, in this experiential, place-based field course, students will engage in a range of interdisciplinary practices to understand and interpret ecological systems and land use issues using artistic and scientific approaches. The core of this course will be based on weekend field trips to diverse sites in the Finger Lakes Region of New York with varied cultural and ecological significance. Sites include Cornell's Biological field station at Shackelton Point on Oneida Lake, Arnot Forest, and several art museums. Immersive stays will allow students to gain a deep understanding of place along with uninterrupted time to work on creative projects independently, in groups, and as a class. Students will gain an understanding of the history of creative interventions and performance in the landscape, as well as scientific approaches to engage with and conceptualize Earth's topography and natural phenomena. Students will have the opportunity to interact with various visiting scientists and artists who are leaders in their fields. Lectures, readings, fireside chats, critique, and interdisciplinary experiences will contribute to students' development. The final product of this class will be an art exhibition at the Soil Factory, an interdisciplinary art space in downtown Ithaca.
outcome: Interrelate field study, scientific research, cultural and artistic practices to deepen a sense of place., Design, conduct, and present site-specific research and artwork., Illustrate knowledge on a wide range of current topics in environmental studies while broadening aesthetic and sensorial capacities to respond to and bolster field-based scientific research., Name, describe and critique the work of a diversity of international artists and scientists who exemplify a holistic study of nature, sustainability, and humanities while learning about the strategies and critical concepts they employ in their work., Gain new perspectives to diversify approaches to students' discipline-specific problems., Use shop tools and/or software for the creation of artwork., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: At least one of the following: a studio art class, a college-level biology class, a visual studies class, an environment &amp; sustainability class, or permission of instructor.

class: ENVS 4262
class title: Environmental Justice: Past, Present, Future
description: "Environmental Justice" is a relatively recent term, coined in the United States in the 1980s.  It usually refers to a social movement fighting against the unfair concentration of toxic sites within impoverished communities of color.  As a broader set of ideas, though, "environmental justice" has a much longer history, going back at least to the 17th century in England, when poor farmers banded together to prevent common land from being enclosed for the exclusive use of the aristocracy.  This course explores that deep history, examining various overlaps between environmental thought and theories of social justice over the past 400 years in the western world.  It concludes with an examination of the current climate justice movement and a consideration of how environmental justice concerns are being played out in recent works of speculative fiction.  What do we owe to the climate refugees of our present day?  What do we owe to future generations?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ENVS 4331
class title: Environmental Law and Policy
description: Environmental law deals with some of today's most pressing challenges. In the fifty years since 1972, when the first World Conference on the Environment was held in Stockholm, and the US Clean Water Act was amended, the field of environmental law and policy has become increasingly sophisticated and complex. Regulation of environmental harms has long been a focus of governmental effort. Over the past half century, however, societies have come to recognize that they must adopt controls on pollution to protect the air, ground, water, atmosphere, and the natural world. Environmental law also increasingly touches on energy, agriculture, and land use law, and has expanded to include a focus on corporate law, international trade, environmental governance, environmental justice, sustainable growth and development, and climate change. In this course, we will look at the major statutes and policies used, at both the federal and state levels, to protect humans and the environment against exposure to harmful substances, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, CERLCA (Superfund), Resource Conservation &amp; Recovery Act, Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), and approaches to protecting endangered species and ecosystems. We will also examine the challenges of global atmospheric pollution, including ozone depletion and climate change. The class will look not only at the substance of these laws and policies, but also review common-law litigation, enforcement challenges, and the role of market mechanisms in addressing environmental issues. Students will become familiar with the history of environmental law and will analyze important landmark cases, as well as the hierarchy of laws, and jurisdictions that shape environmental law and policy. Students will apply their knowledge to real examples, with the goal of developing innovative legal solutions for the critical environmental challenges facing our world today.

class: ENVS 4500
class title: Climate Solutions Capstone
description: Interested in working toward solutions to the climate crisis? In this course, you will choose and implement a climate action from Project Drawdown's (www.drawdown.org) list of 82 climate solutions. You will also apply social sciences research to influence your friends or family to implement your climate action alongside you. For the capstone team project, you will work with other students and a community partner (Cornell Cooperative Extension or Climate Action Now) to support education related to plant-rich diet, low-emissions agriculture, forest regeneration, or other climate solutions. Interested students should have a general understanding of climate change science.
outcome: Compare approaches to mitigating climate change and choose an individual climate mitigation action., Apply social sciences research to develop and implement an action plan to influence one of your social networks (e.g., friends, family, Instagram followers) to take that action alongside you., Create your own arguments for the responsibility of individuals, corporations, and the broader collective to foster climate and food justice., Collaborate professionally and equitably with community partners to develop educational materials related to sustainable food, agricultural, and forestry practices and policies., Communicate through a variety of media including writing, presentations, and apps. 6. Evaluate and respond to constructive peer feedback on discussion boards and during real-time online discussions., 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: ENVS 4600
class title: Planning for Environmental Conservation and Sustainability
description: An interactive course designed to provide students with experience applying some of the most important techniques that are used to develop plans to protect and sustain valuable environmental resources, such as species, ecosystems, land, and water. The class focuses on highly charged controversies over conservation, and students learn how planning can help them to identify and address the full range of ecological and social factors that lead to conservation success in these contexts. Students adopt the roles of stakeholders and work on intensive case studies of conservation issues, learning how ecological and social insight are integrated for effective conservation planning. Topics covered in the course include: rational planning, adaptive management, stakeholder engagement, and conflict resolution.
outcome: Students will learn to define conservation issues, develop plans (including goals, objectives, strategies, and actions) to address those issues, and identify potential positive and negative consequences of these plans., Students will be able to recognize and describe the range of ecological and social factors that influence the success of conservation efforts., Students will be able to identify and describe the stages of the planning process and learn how to carry out the activities that occur during these stages., For specific current issues in environmental conservation, students will recognize key stakeholder groups and be able to describe: these stakeholders' interests and concerns, points of contention between different stakeholders, and possible strategies and actions for addressing these points of contention., Students will develop their written and oral communications skills., Students will develop their abilities to work individually and in groups., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: ENVS 4960
class title: Internship in Environment and Sustainability
description: In this course, students participate in an experiential learning opportunity relevant to the student's focus of study or career goals in environment and sustainability. An E&amp;S faculty member must serve as supervisor and complete the term grade report. Specific learning goals for the experience are arranged by the student with their internship faculty supervisor and the internship host prior to the start of the internship. All 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS Internship Guidelines. Students from any major or college may enroll in ENVS 4970 using the CALS Special Studies form. 

class: ENVS 4970
class title: Individual Study in Environment and Sustainability
description: Individual studies are arranged under the supervision of one or several E&amp;S faculty members. They provide opportunity to design a course that fills the need of an individual student and addresses pertinent issues in the environmental sciences. Students from any major or college may enroll in ENVS 4970 using the CALS Special Studies form. 

class: ENVS 4980
class title: Teaching Experience in Environment and Sustainability
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and assisting in courses in the Environment &amp; Sustainability curriculum. This experience may include facilitating discussion groups and assisting in field or laboratory classes. Undergraduate teaching assistants will regularly discuss course objectives and teaching techniques with the faculty member in charge of the course.
outcome: Explain the fundamental concepts presented in the course., Support student learning through one-to-one and group instruction., Help maintain the course CANVAS site., Plan and present interactive class activities., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught, or equivalent and permission of instructor. 

class: ENVS 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Environment and Sustainability
description: Undergraduate research projects in environment and sustainability; contingent on student working with a faculty member to supervise their research.

class: FDSC 1101
class title: Science and Technology of Foods
description: Explores the application of science and technology to foods. Lectures elucidate the role of engineering, biotechnology, chemistry, biochemistry, nutrition, toxicology, and microbiology in supplying the world with safe and nutritious food. An overview of food science as a discipline and career choice is given. A laboratory exercise in food development is undertaken.
outcome: Identify and describe the subdisciplines of food science, and the importance of interdisciplinary interaction in the food industry and academia., Identify and describe basic concepts in Food Science., Explain how commercial ice cream is made., Be able to explain basic ingredient functionality in the context of ice cream formulation and production., Evaluate how foods and Food Science have an impact on our everyday lives., 

class: FDSC 1200
class title: Farm to Label
description: Farm to Label will focus on contemporaneous topics in agriculture and food science covering an eclectic array of areas including the history, technology and products that are part of the food supply. Farm to Label is a dynamic course designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of the sustainable agricultural practices and food production processes that underpin the modern food industry. This course delves into critical topics such as agricultural systems, environmental sustainability, food safety, quality control, and marketing strategies. Weekly topics will include: (1) Evolution of things like fire, cooking and meat-eating (2) Historical pathways will be covered on products such as salt, spices and spam (3) Technological advances such as pasteurization, high pressure processing and consumer level technology.
outcome: After this course students should be able to examine the historical evolution of key food ingredients, processing techniques, and product innovations, highlighting their cultural, geographic, and chronological significance., After this course students should be able to identify and analyze the historical and cultural contexts that have shaped the development of specific food products, from their origins to contemporary production., After this course students should be able to articulate research and findings in both written and oral formats, effectively conveying historical insights and their relevance to the modern farm-to-label industry., After this course students should be able to  analyze the key principles of sustainable agriculture and their application to the farm-to-label supply chain, including organic farming practices, biodiversity preservation, and soil health management., After this course students should be able to assess the environmental impacts associated with various stages of food production, from cultivation and harvesting to processing, packaging, and distribution., After this course students should be able to analyze complex problems in the farm-to-label supply chain, identifying key issues related to sustainability, quality control, and regulatory compliance., After this course students should be able to evaluate data, research, and information relevant to the farm-to-label industry, critically assessing sources and their credibility., After this course students should be able to demonstrate the ability to think creatively and propose innovative solutions for improving the efficiency, sustainability, and quality of farm-to-label processes., 

class: FDSC 2000
class title: Introduction to Physiochemical and Biological Aspects of Foods
description: Comprehensive introduction to the physical, chemical, and nutritional properties of foods and to the principles and practice of food science and technology. Topics include chemistry and functionality of commodities and ingredients, chemical, physical and biological phenomena that affect food quality, techniques of processing and preservation, microbiology and fermentation, food safety, regulation, and contemporary issues.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to define parameters that collectively determine the quality of foods, and describe the chemical, biochemical, and biological phenomena that impact quality parameters., Demonstrate the ability to link the functionality of food ingredients with their chemical and physical, nutritional, and biological characteristics in the context of specific foods or categories of foods., Identify and describe the physicochemical and biological phenomena that underlie the major methods of food preservation, and recognize foods whose quality is extended by the use of such methods., Demonstrate the ability to independently locate authoritative information on food regulation and composition, and on contemporary issues of national and international importance using federal web-based resources., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college-level courses in general chemistry and biology; organic chemistry or concurrent registration.

class: FDSC 2205
class title: Growing Grapes and Making Wines Laboratory
description: Field trips, vineyard and winery work provide opportunities for application of knowledge gained in Grapes to Wines lecture course. Students will produce a wine, from grape harvest determination to cold stabilization. Some winery activities between laboratory sessions plus a two-day field trip expected.
outcome: Demonstrate wine analytical techniques., Identify different grapevine species and cultivars in the vineyard., Assess fruit ripening and make good decisions about harvest time., Explain each step in winemaking process, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Produce wines from grape harvest to cold stabilized products., Demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 1105/VIEN 1105. Prerequisite or Corequisite: VIEN 2204.

class: FDSC 2310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer
description: This course uses beer and brewing science as a starting point to explore topics in fermentation biology, food chemistry, food processing, and sensory perception. Students will learn to recognize the major sensory and chemical features that distinguish different beer styles or defects, and understand how raw materials and choices during production lead to these outcomes. Several guest lectures, including brewers and producers of raw materials, will also be included.
outcome: Differentiate between the basic physiological senses of human perception of foods and beverages. Describe how these senses are utilized to perceive the qualities of foods and beverages., Describe some of the fundamental principles of odor and taste perception., Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations, Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Describe the sensory properties of major beer styles and explain how they differ in production practices and chemical composition., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Summarize the positive health impacts of moderate beer consumption and contrast these benefits with the negative health impacts of alcohol misuse/abuse. Also differentiate between the current treatment options for alcohol use disorders., Summarize ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology and chemistry, or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 3930
class title: Craft Fermentations
description: The course will cover the science and commerce of craft fermentations, focusing on smaller-scale, complex processes. Products will include vinegar, miso and alcoholic beverages. Fermented foods are growing in popularity due to their inherent organoleptic complexity and potential human health benefits. The course will focus on the science of fermentations and invite in a variety of expert practitioners from a range of different companies to offer their perspectives. A different fermented food will be covered each week using examples that highlight complex fermentations which result from a succession of microbial populations during the course of the fermentation.
outcome: Describe the basic principles of biochemistry and microbiology that apply to food fermentations., Articulate connections between the biochemistry and microbiology for the food fermentation processes., Analyze commercial practices in food fermentations., Communicate acquired knowledge from scientific literature., 

class: FDSC 3940
class title: Applied and Food Microbiology
description: Food Science 3940 will focus on the origin, transmission, consequences, and management of diverse microbiota throughout the food chain. Topics in this course generally include: 1) the microbiota of different food systems, 2) the physiology, metabolism, and pathogenesis of important groups of microbes, and 3) application of food microbiology to the industrial sector. You will receive a basic education in interdisciplinary subjects that require knowledge of microbiology, food safety, epidemiology, public health, biotechnology, and cell metabolism. Knowledge and expertise gained in this course will support your qualification for a future career in food science, biotechnology, or microbiology.
outcome: Identify the microbiota relevant to a given food product, process, or environment., Describe the causes of and mechanisms behind foodborne disease, fermentation, and spoilage., Determine the relevant conditions or measures needed to promote safety, fermentation, or reduce spoilage., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2900 and BIOMI 2911.

class: FDSC 3950
class title: Food Microbiology Laboratory
description: Work includes study of the physiological characteristics of representative food microorganisms, practice in using general and rapid methods for microbiological testing and control of food products, and practice in the application of a systematic approach to controlling the safety of foods, or addressing a food safety issue.
outcome: Use different sampling and plating methods to enumerate and identify microorganisms found in food products., Test different commodities for legal microbial standards., Isolate and culture bacteria used in food fermentations., Conduct environmental sampling in a food plant., Describe modern technologies used in food microbiology., Formulate a hypothesis and propose a protocol to test it., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMI 2911 or equivalent.

class: FDSC 4010
class title: Concepts of Food Product Development
description: Introduction to topics and events sequence that provide the foundation for development of new food products, building upon knowledge acquired from other food science courses. The course allows students to integrate and apply basic concepts into case-based learning experiences to enhance professional skills, utilizing individual assessments and team-work assignments.
outcome: Evaluate the complexities/intricacies governing the development of new and improved food products., Apply food science and marketing principles to the food product development process., Demonstrate awareness of the variety of product testing protocols available to evaluate food product quality and consumer acceptance., Identify challenges associated with various sourcing ingredients, manufacturing venues and distribution channels and diverse consumer preferences and needs., Effectively utilize synergistic team-work to solve problems, enhance critical thinking, include diverse viewpoints, and strengthen communication skills., Identify and apply appropriate food regulations and safety measures to ensure the safety of new products., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 3940, FDSC 4170, and FDSC 4210 or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 4050
class title: Dairy Chemistry
description: This course will discuss the general composition of milk, with a special focus on the chemistry and functionality of the high value components of milk (lipids and proteins).
outcome: Students will be able explain the biochemical pathways of milk fat, protein, and lactose are synthesis in the context of the structure and organization of the bovine mammary cell., Students will be able to explain how stage of lactation and dairy cow diet changes the chemical structure of milk fat and melting properties of milk fat and texture of dairy products., Students will learn the differences in chemical structure of the 5 major proteins in milk and be able to explain how differences structure impact how the proteins interact when subjected to thermal stress, mechanical stress, and pH change., Graduate students will be able to explain the relationship between chemical structure and infrared light absorbance of milk to measure the concentration of fat, protein, lactose and fatty acid composition., Graduate students will be able to explain the chemical and physical changes that happen to milk fat, protein, and lactose during thermal processing and integrate how those changes impact flavor, appearance and texture of dairy products., Graduate students will be able to explain the chemical changes that occur during aging of Cheddar, provolone, and camembert cheeses and express how those changes create the flavor and textural differences among these cheeses., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: general chemistry (CHEM 1560, CHEM 2070, and/or CHEM 2080), organic chemistry (CHEM 1570, CHEM 3570, and/or CHEM 3580), and Food Chemistry I (FDSC 4170).

class: FDSC 4100
class title: Sensory Evaluation of Food
description: Topics include the sensory evaluation methods used to test the flavor, appearance, and texture of foods by quantitative description and simple difference testing; consumer testing for product acceptability; sensory tests in quality control; strategic product research; and product development. Presents the psychological principles in sensory testing and statistical methods for sensory data analysis. The lab provides firsthand experience in organizing and conducting sensory tests and an introduction to online data collection and analysis.
outcome: Familiarize students with the test methods involved in discrimination, descriptive analysis and consumer sensory testing of food products., Examine the types of statistical analyses used to summarize sensory data and to draw conclusions and make recommendations about product characteristics., Understand principles of physiology, psychology and measurement upon which methods of sensory testing are based., Understand how a sensory evaluation provides important information in the product development process., Enhance scientific and business communication skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics course.

class: FDSC 4210
class title: Food Engineering Principles
description: Introduces the engineering principles underlying food processes and equipment with an emphasis on their utility in manufacturing operations. Focus is on applications of engineering concepts and transport phenomena to unit operations and process development. Topics include the fundamental principles of thermodynamics, mass and energy balance, fluid mechanics, heat and mass transport, refrigeration, and psychrometrics.
outcome: Describe the principles of food engineering (mass and heat transfer, fluid flow, thermodynamics)., Apply steady-state mass and energy balances to simple food processes and formulations., Apply the principles of fluid statics and fluid dynamics to real systems., Underline the principles and practices of psychrometrics., Demonstrate competency in the use of phase diagrams, steam tables, and thermal properties (enthalpy, heat capacity, conductivity)., Graduate students: Analyze food manufacturing operations and their utility in product development., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 2000 and introductory physics.

class: FDSC 4230
class title: Unit Operations and Food Packaging
description: This lecture course surveys unit operations, engineering/manufacturing principles, and materials common in the commercial processing and packaging of foods and beverages. The objective of this course is for students to understand common unit operations and packaging materials used to manufacture foods with consistency, quality, and safety.
outcome: Describe key unit operations in food processing., Be able to determine thermal processing parameters (D and z values) and understand their application in processing of foods and relationship to food safety., Identify the advantages, limitations, & food applications of different types of food packaging., Construct a process flow diagram with equipment details for a food product., Name principles of food manufacturing equipment design, based on an understanding of the basic elements of machine design and fabrication methods relevant to food applications., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 4210.

class: FDSC 4240
class title: Food Processing Laboratory
description: This is a senior-level laboratory course focused on demonstrating engineering principles, unit operations, and technologies commonly used during processing and packaging of foods.
outcome: Build and explain process flow diagrams used in food processing., Identify processing equipment used to manufacture or package food products and describe how they work., Apply mass and heat balances to food product manufacturing., Conduct specific tests for assessing the quality of food products., Collect, process, analyze, and report data., Perform lab and pilot scale basic unit operations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 4210.

class: FDSC 4310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer Laboratory
description: An introduction to the practical application of brewing. Students will make several different styles of beer in a laboratory setting to understand how raw materials and processing technologies influence the production of recognizable beer styles. Emphasis will be placed on sanitation, raw material selection, yeast selection, and the manipulation of process variables to control product outcomes. Students will also learn the alternatives in current practice for finishing, carbonation, and packaging.
outcome: Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Describe and differentiate beer processing, fermentation, and aging parameters used in different styles of traditional beer production., Explain the role of the raw materials (grains, fruits, and other agricultural products, barrels, etc.) and the choices that distillers have in their use and source., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Describe ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204 and VIEN 2205/FDSC 2205.

class: FDSC 4400
class title: Wine and Grape Flavor Chemistry
description: Uses a (bio)-chemical perspective to investigate viticulture and enological factors that impact flavor and other quality attributes (mouthfeel, color, stability) of wine and wine grapes.
outcome: Identify and describe (orally and in writing) the key compounds that influence wine organoleptic properties., Identify and describe how viticultural and enological practices affect those key compounds., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one semester of general chemistry and one semester of organic chemistry required. Recommended prerequisite: prior course work in or knowledge of viticulture and enology.

class: FDSC 4500
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I
description: Provides an in-depth study of the chemical, physical, technological, microbiological and regulatory fundamentals of winemaking. Concentration is on grape and must handling, juice adjustments and treatments, diverse production methods and wine styles, and regulatory compliance. Equipment used in grape processing and wine production is studied. Course builds on previous winemaking course material regarding grape processing and alcoholic and malolactic fermentation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204, VIEN 2205, VIEN 2400, and BIOMI 2900, or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 4510
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I Laboratory
description: Students will produce, monitor, and evaluate diverse wine styles from several grape varieties using different vinification techniques. The laboratory includes introductory lectures, grape handling and vinification using various equipment and production methods, and emphasizes good production practices including sanitation. Students must develop their own winemaking plan for several different grape varieties, and participate in self-guided wine production activities, thus previous experience in wine production is highly recommended.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: FDSC 4500/VIEN 4500.

class: FDSC 4880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability,climate change, and economic development in the US, China, India, and other countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers ., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: FDSC 4960
class title: Undergraduate Internship in Food Science
description: On-the-job learning experience under the supervision of professionals in a cooperating organization. A learning contract is written between the faculty supervisor and students, stating the conditions of the work assignment, supervision, and reporting. All 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at cals.cornell.edu/academics/student-research/internship.

class: FDSC 4970
class title: Individual Study in Food Science
description: May include individual tutorial study, a special topic selected by a professor or a group of students, or selected lectures of a course already offered. Since topics vary, the course may be repeated for credit.

class: FDSC 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching Experience
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training and experience. Students meet with a discussion or laboratory section and regularly discuss objectives with the course instructor.

class: FDSC 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Food Science
description: Students conduct original research directed by a food science faculty member.

class: FDSC 5010
class title: Concepts of Food Product Development
description: Introduction to topics and events sequence that provide the foundation for development of new food products, building upon knowledge acquired from other food science courses. The course allows students to integrate and apply basic concepts into case-based learning experiences to enhance professional skills, utilizing individual assessments and team-work assignments.
outcome: Evaluate the complexities/intricacies governing the development of new and improved food products., Apply food science and marketing principles to the food product development process., Demonstrate awareness of the variety of product testing protocols available to evaluate food product quality and consumer acceptance., Identify challenges associated with various sourcing ingredients, manufacturing venues and distribution channels and diverse consumer preferences and needs., Effectively utilize synergistic team-work to solve problems, enhance critical thinking, include diverse viewpoints, and strengthen communication skills., Identify and apply appropriate food regulations and safety measures to ensure the safety of new products., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 3940, FDSC 4170, and FDSC 4210 or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 5050
class title: Dairy Chemistry
description: This course will discuss the general composition of milk, with a special focus on the chemistry and functionality of the high value components of milk (lipids and proteins).
outcome: Students will be able explain the biochemical pathways of milk fat, protein, and lactose are synthesis in the context of the structure and organization of the bovine mammary cell., Students will be able to explain how stage of lactation and dairy cow diet changes the chemical structure of milk fat and melting properties of milk fat and texture of dairy products., Students will learn the differences in chemical structure of the 5 major proteins in milk and be able to explain how differences structure impact how the proteins interact when subjected to thermal stress, mechanical stress, and pH change., Graduate students will be able to explain the relationship between chemical structure and infrared light absorbance of milk to measure the concentration of fat, protein, lactose and fatty acid composition., Graduate students will be able to explain the chemical and physical changes that happen to milk fat, protein, and lactose during thermal processing and integrate how those changes impact flavor, appearance and texture of dairy products., Graduate students will be able to explain the chemical changes that occur during aging of Cheddar, provolone, and camembert cheeses and express how those changes create the flavor and textural differences among these cheeses., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: general chemistry (CHEM 1560, CHEM 2070, and/or CHEM 2080), organic chemistry (CHEM 1570, CHEM 3570, and/or CHEM 3580), and Food Chemistry I (FDSC 4170).

class: FDSC 5100
class title: Sensory Evaluation of Food
description: Topics include the sensory evaluation methods used to test the flavor, appearance, and texture of foods by quantitative description and simple difference testing; consumer testing for product acceptability; sensory tests in quality control; strategic product research; and product development. Presents the psychological principles in sensory testing and statistical methods for sensory data analysis. The lab provides firsthand experience in organizing and conducting sensory tests and an introduction to online data collection and analysis.
outcome: Familiarize students with the test methods involved in discrimination, descriptive analysis and consumer sensory testing of food products., Examine the types of statistical analyses used to summarize sensory data and to draw conclusions and make recommendations about product characteristics., Understand principles of physiology, psychology and measurement upon which methods of sensory testing are based., Understand how a sensory evaluation provides important information in the product development process., Enhance scientific and business communication skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics course.

class: FDSC 5205
class title: Growing Grapes and Making Wines Graduate Laboratory
description: Field trips, vineyard and winery work provide opportunities for application of knowledge gained in Grapes to Wines lecture course. Students will produce a wine, from grape harvest determination to cold stabilization. Some winery activities between laboratory sessions plus a two-day field trip expected.
outcome: Demonstrate wine analytical techniques., Identify different grapevine species and cultivers in the vineyard., Assess fruit ripening and make good decisions about harvest time., Explain each step in winemaking process, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Produce wines from grape harvest to cold stabilized products 6- demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: VIEN 5204.

class: FDSC 5210
class title: Food Engineering Principles
description: Applications of engineering concepts and transport phenomena to unit operations in food processing. Emphasis on the fundamental principles of thermodynamics, material and energy balances and momentum, heat and mass transport processes.
outcome: Introduce students to the basic engineering aspects of food processing operations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 2000 and introductory physics.

class: FDSC 5230
class title: Unit Operations and Food Packaging
description: This lecture course surveys unit operations, engineering/manufacturing principles, and materials common in the commercial processing and packaging of foods and beverages. The objective of this course is for students to understand common unit operations and packaging materials used to manufacture foods with consistency, quality, and safety.
outcome: Describe key unit operations in food processing., Be able to determine thermal processing parameters (D and z values) and understand their application in processing of foods and relationship to food safety., Identify the advantages, limitations, & food applications of different types of food packaging., Construct a process flow diagram with equipment details for a food product., Name principles of food manufacturing equipment design, based on an understanding of the basic elements of machine design and fabrication methods relevant to food applications., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FDSC 4210.

class: FDSC 5310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer
description: This course uses beer and brewing science as a starting point to explore topics in fermentation biology, food chemistry, food processing, and sensory perception. Students will learn to recognize the major sensory and chemical features that distinguish different beer styles or defects, and understand how raw materials and choices during production lead to these outcomes. Several guest lectures, including brewers and producers of raw materials, will also be included.
outcome: Differentiate between the basic physiological senses of human perception of foods and beverages. Describe how these senses are utilized to perceive the qualities of foods and beverages., Describe some of the fundamental principles of odor and taste perception., Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Describe the sensory properties of major beer styles and explain how they differ in production practices and chemical composition., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Summarize the positive health impacts of moderate beer consumption and contrast these benefits with the negative health impacts of alcohol misuse/abuse. Also differentiate between the current treatment options for alcohol use disorders., Summarize ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology and chemistry, or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 5500
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I
description: Provides an in-depth study of the chemical, physical, technological, microbiological and regulatory fundamentals of winemaking. Concentration is on grape and must handling, juice adjustments and treatments, diverse production methods and wine styles, and regulatory compliance. Equipment used in grape processing and wine production is studied. Course builds on previous winemaking course material regarding grape processing and alcoholic and malolactic fermentation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204, VIEN 2205, VIEN 2400, and BIOMI 2911, or permission of instructor.

class: FDSC 5510
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I Laboratory
description: Students will produce, monitor, and evaluate diverse wine styles from several grape varieties using different vinification techniques. The laboratory includes introductory lectures, grape handling and vinification using various equipment and production methods, and emphasizes good production practices including sanitation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: FDSC 5500/VIEN 5500.

class: FDSC 5930
class title: Craft Fermentations
description: The course will cover the science and commerce of craft fermentations, focusing on smaller-scale, complex processes. Products will include vinegar, miso and alcoholic beverages. Fermented foods are growing in popularity due to their inherent organoleptic complexity and potential human health benefits. The course will focus on the science of fermentations and invite in a variety of expert practitioners from a range of different companies to offer their perspectives. A different fermented food will be covered each week using examples that highlight complex fermentations which result from a succession of microbial populations during the course of the fermentation.
outcome: Describe the basic principles of biochemistry and microbiology that apply to food fermentations., Articulate connections between the biochemistry and microbiology for the food fermentation processes., Analyze commercial practices in food fermentations., Communicate acquired knowledge from scientific literature., 

class: FDSC 6000
class title: Seminar in Food Science
description: Weekly seminar series on contemporary topics and issues in the field of food science and technology. Representatives from academia, industry, and government provide presentations on a wide variety of topics. Graduate students in the field of food science and technology may use the forum to present their required thesis research seminar.

class: FDSC 6010
class title: Principles and Applications of Food Science and Technology
description: Students are first introduced to the principles and applications in food chemistry, food microbiology, food processing and engineering, sensory science, and international food science. Then students review and discuss the research literature in these fields.
outcome: Identify scholarly research related to a field of food science., Analyze, evaluate, and discuss a food ethics case study., Recognize and explain the core competencies of food science., Demonstrate the fundamentals of effectively writing academic and professional papers., 

class: FDSC 6310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer Laboratory
description: An introduction to the practical application of brewing. Students will make several different styles of beer in a laboratory setting to understand how raw materials and processing technologies influence the production of recognizable beer styles. Emphasis will be placed on sanitation, raw material selection, yeast selection, and the manipulation of process variables to control product outcomes. Students will also learn the alternatives in current practice for finishing, carbonation, and packaging.
outcome: Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Describe and differentiate beer processing, fermentation, and aging parameters used in different styles of traditional beer production., Explain the role of the raw materials (grains, fruits, and other agricultural products, barrels, etc.) and the choices that distillers have in their use and source., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Describe ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204 and VIEN 2205/FDSC 2205.

class: FDSC 6400
class title: Wine and Grape Flavor Chemistry
description: Uses a (bio)-chemical perspective to investigate viticulture and enological factors that impact flavor and other quality attributes (mouthfeel, color, stability) of wine and wine grapes.
outcome: Identify and describe (orally and in writing) the key compounds that influence wine organoleptic properties., Identify and describe how viticultural and enological practices affect those key compounds., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one semester of general chemistry and one semester of organic chemistry required. Recommended prerequisite: prior coursework in or knowledge of viticulture and enology.

class: FDSC 6880
class title: Global Food, Energy, and Water Nexus – Engage the US, China, and India for Sustainable Future
description: This course is offered by six Departments at Cornell, in collaboration with five Universities in China and one India. Video conferencing will be used to connect classrooms in the three countries in real time. Important issues related to the food, energy, and water nexus and its implications for nutrition security, one health, environmental sustainability, climate change, and economic development in the US and these two countries will be described. Challenges associated with these issues will be evaluated and strategies to address them will be proposed. Engagement of these countries with each other and the rest of the world will be explored. The course serves as a platform for students from Cornell, China, and India to learn from and interact with each other in the same class, and to share their thinking, creativity, and perspectives on these issues.
outcome: Identify and compare the major food, nutrition and health, energy, water, and economic challenges facing the US, China, and India., Describe barriers to food and nutrition security for all people in each of the three countries and globally and propose solutions for overcoming these barriers., Identify and quantify the requirements of energy and water for producing, processing, transporting, and/or preparing food., Evaluate various predictions of regional and global impacts of climate change on agricultural production and human health in the 21st century., Collaborate as members of interdisciplinary teams composed of students from the US, China, and India to analyze and solve problems that affect food, water, and energy security., Effectively and respectfully debate, with people of opposing views, issues related to food, water, and energy nexus., Prepare and deliver focused, clear, impactful, and culturally sensitive presentations to an international audience of peers., 

class: FDSC 6950
class title: Current Readings in Food Science
description: Seminar series on current topics chosen by participating faculty members and students on a rotating basis. Format consists of weekly discussion groups with each participant presenting at least one oral report based on independent reading. Multiple sections focusing on different topics may be taught in any given semester. Topics include food microbiology and food safety, food chemistry, sensory evaluation, and food engineering and materials science. Interested students should contact the designated instructor(s) for each semester.
outcome: Participate in a habitual engagement with current literature., Demonstrate skills related to the critical evaluation of methods and conclusions., Lead academic conversation within a given field of literature, 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: upper division course relevant to chosen topic.

class: FDSC 6960
class title: Graduate Internship in Food Science
description: On-the-job learning experience under the supervision of professionals in a cooperating organization. A learning contract is written between the faculty supervisor and students, stating the conditions of the work assignment, supervision, and reporting. All 6960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at www.cals.cornell.edu/cals/current/student-research/internship/index.cfm.

class: FDSC 6970
class title: Graduate Individual Study in Food Science
description: Independent study for graduate students.

class: FDSC 6980
class title: Graduate Teaching Experience
description: Designed to give graduate students teaching experience through involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of field faculty members. The experience may include leading discussion sections; preparing, assisting in, or teaching lectures and laboratories; and tutoring.
outcome: Communicate select scientific topics to undergraduate students., Organize class materials and activities to facilitate student learning., Assess student learning using tools appropriate to the specific types of classes., 

class: FDSC 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis Research for MS students in the Field of Food Science &amp; Technology.

class: FDSC 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Thesis Research
description: Dissertation research for PhD students in the Field of Food Science &amp; Technology.

class: FGSS 1100
class title: FWS: Topics in Feminist, Gender and Sexuality Studies
description: This course offers students the opportunity to study a wide range of fields from the perspectives of feminist and LGBT critical analysis, in a global context and with the purpose of promoting social justice. Our first-year writing seminars investigate how gender and sexuality are embedded in cultural, social, and political formations. FGSS pays close attention to the complex structures of power and inequality, tracing intersections and relationships among sexuality, race, class, age, ethnicity, and other aspects of identity within their specific contexts of history and geography. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: FGSS 2010
class title: Introduction to Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
description: Feminist, Gender, &amp; Sexuality Studies is an interdisciplinary program focused on understanding the impact of gender and sexuality on the world around us and on the power hierarchies that structure it. This course provides an overview of key concepts, questions, and debates within feminist studies both locally and globally, focusing mainly on the experiences, historical conditions, and concerns of women as they are shaped by gender and sexuality. We will read a variety of texts--personal narratives, historical documents, and cultural criticism--across a range of disciplines, and will consider how larger structural systems of both privilege and oppression affect individuals' identities, experiences, and options. We will also examine forms of agency and action taken by women in the face of these larger systems.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 2024
class title: Ecological Justice: Feminist, Queer, and Trans Perspectives
description: This course is an in-depth study of ecological justice from feminist, queer, and trans perspectives. Historically, people marginalized by race, gender, sexuality, disability, and poverty have borne the brunt of environmental degradation. But they have also led environmental movements and ecological theorizing around the globe. Drawing on the traditions of ecofeminism, racial justice, queer and trans ecology, and disability theory, students will learn how feminist, queer, and trans thinking has reshaped binaries at the heart of environmental ethics, including nature/artifice, human/animal, stranger/kin, science/poetics, and activism/daily life. As such, students will deepen their knowledge of intersectional justice within a more-than-human world.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 2806
class title: Roman Law
description: This course presents a cultural and historical perspective on ideas of agency, responsibility, and punishment through foundational texts of western law. We will primarily focus on three main areas of law: (1) slavery and (2) family (both governed by the Roman law of persons), and (3) civil wrongs (the law of delict or culpable harm). Through an examination of the legal sources (in translation) and the study of the reasoning of the Roman jurists, this course will examine the evolution of jurisprudence: the development of the laws concerning power over slaves and women, and changes in the laws concerning penalties for crimes. No specific prior knowledge needed.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: FGSS 3000
class title: Feminist Theory
description: This course will work across and between the disciplines to consider what it might mean to think 'as a feminist' about many things including, but not limited to 'gender', 'women' and 'sexuality'. We will approach theory as a tool for analyzing relations of power and a means of transforming ways of thinking and living. In particular, we will investigate the cultural, social, and historical assumptions that shape the possibilities and problematics of gender and sexuality. Throughout we will attend to specific histories of class, race, ethnicity, culture, nation, religion and sexuality, with an eye to their particular incitements to and challenges for feminist thinking and politics.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 3316
class title: What's in a Sound? Gender and Race in Sound Cultures
description: What can we hear or see in a sound? Can the sound of a voice conjure traces of a body? How does sound, musical or otherwise, construct gender and race? In this course, we will consider how listening, speaking, and music operate as mechanisms of representation. We will pay particular attention to the work representations do and how they connect to systems of power and identity. From voice-overs and machine listening to reggaeton and Brazilian funk, we will examine the ways sound practices not only mirror gendered, racial, and sexual politics but also produce them. Through several case studies, we will find that the very possibilities of representations are embedded in historical contexts and the variability of media objects.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 3322
class title: Gospel and The Blues: A Black Women's History I, 1900-1973
description: In her pathbreaking text Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval Saidiya Hartman writes that "young Black women were radical thinkers who tirelessly imagined other ways to live and never failed to consider how the world might be otherwise." This two-semester course endeavors to travel through those worlds using the cultural and musical forms of gospel and the blues as our compass. The first semester is guided by the work of scholars and writers like Angela Davis, Hazel Carby, Alice Walker, and Gayl Jones and artists like Ethel Waters, Bessie Smith, Victoria Spivey, and Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Together we will interrogate the spectrum of lived experiences making for a kaleidoscopic sonic history of joy, pleasure, sorrow, resistance, and everything in between.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3400
class title: Social Justice: Special Topics
description: Social Justice highlights refugee-led organizing and its intersections with un/documented and Indigenous beyond borders activism. We will work with and learn from refugee and asylum seekers led organizations that are started by and run by members of formerly displaced groups. These organizations build collectives and coalitions to organize communities across identities and legal categories and advocate for access to mobility and social justice. We will closely collaborate with these organizations and work on joint research projects.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: FGSS 3464
class title: Representational Ethics in Film and Television
description: This course is designed to explore the varied ways that race and gender intersect with the media industry. While common industrial logic suggests these descriptors of identity are not a factor in terms of its business models and assumptions, the reality is much more complex. Race, as well as gender, class, and sexuality, play large parts in how media industries function and in informing and shaping audience expectations and assumptions. Thus, the time spent in class will largely consist of deconstructing several media industries, including film, television, and new media to show just how race, as well as other modes of identity such as gender, sexuality, and class, operate within it. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3591
class title: Kids Rule! Children's Popular Culture
description: How is the figure of the child constructed in popular culture? When and to what degree do children participate in the construction of these representations? This course surveys a variety of contemporary media texts (television, film, and the internet) aimed at children ranging in age from pre-kindergarten to young adults. We explore how these texts seek to construct children as empowered consumers, contesting adult conformity. Our theoretical approach complicates definitions of childhood as a time of innocence and potential victimhood and challenges normative constructions of childhood as a time for establishing "proper" sexual and gender identities. Taking a cultural studies approach, the class will consider the connections between the cultural texts and the realms of advertising, toys, and gaming.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3636
class title: Queer Classics
description: This course engages classical antiquity and its reception through the prism of queer studies. Cruising Homer, Sappho, Euripides, Plato, Ovid and more, we will explore how queer theoretical frameworks help us account for premodern queer and trans bodies, desires, experiences, and aesthetics. We will trace how people historically have engaged with the classical past in political and affective projects of writing queer history and literature, constructing identities and communities, and imagining queer futures. We will unpack how classical scholarship might reproduce contemporary forms of homophobia and transphobia in its treatments of gender, sexuality, and embodiment in the classical past, and in turn how modern uses of the classical might reinforce or dismantle exclusionary narratives around 'queerness' today as it intersects with race, gender, sexuality, and class. Finally, we will consider how the work we are doing in this class (where the 'Queer' in 'Queer Classics' may be taken as an adjective or an imperative) relates to the ways that contemporary writers, activists, artists, and performers have animated the classical past with queer possibilities. All readings will be in translation; no knowledge of Latin and Greek is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3651
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: FGSS 3686
class title: Feminism and Islam in North Africa
description: The course is a survey of Feminist Islamic thinkers from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, and their diaspora, featuring both French and Arabic texts in English translation. The purpose of the course is to critically explore the competing treatment of major gendered tropes in a Muslim context (the veil, the harem, polygamy, etc.) by North African thinkers, through their examination of qur'anic surats/hadiths, the evolution of tafsirs (tradion of qur'anic exegesis) as well as their conflicting approaches to secular western feminism. Readings might include: Fatema Mernissi, Asmaa Lamrabet, Qasim Amin, Naguib Mahfoud, Assia Djebar, Mona Eltahawy, and Nawal El-Saadawi.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3721
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground.  We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3740
class title: Parody
description: In A Theory of Parody, Linda Hutcheon defines parody broadly as "repetition with critical difference, which marks difference rather than similarity." Taking a cue from Hutcheon, we will consider parody as a form of meaning making that is not necessarily used in the service of ridicule. Rather, we will examine a number of late-twentieth- and early-twenty-first-century imitative works in order to distinguish the rich variety of political agendas and aesthetic rationales for recent parody. An emphasis on postmodern or contemporary performances and media that renovate images, ideas, and icons from modernism and modernity will unite our otherwise diverse efforts. Some of these efforts will also highlight what happens when an artist takes up a work made for one platform (for example, theatre, performance art, installation, cinema, television, the Web) and parodies it in another. Creators and works under consideration may range from Christopher Durang, Split Britches, and Pig Iron Theatre Company to The Simpsons, Cookie's Fortune, and Strindberg and Helium.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 3990
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study
description: Individual study program intended for juniors and seniors working on special topics with selected reading or research projects not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with a FGSS faculty member who has agreed to supervise the independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FGSS 2010 or FGSS 3000, and one additional 3000-level FGSS course.

class: FGSS 4100
class title: The Seminar
description: Topics vary by instructor.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 4124
class title: Trans Theory and the Question of Gender
description: The question "What is gender?" is an increasingly thorny and political one. This course provides students with an advanced introduction to debates about the nature and function of gender in contemporary trans theory and trans philosophy. Throughout the seminar, we will analyze various definitions of gender offered by trans thinkers: gender as genus, as genre, as performance, as self-identity, and as colonial category. We will critically assess the value and limitations of key gender terms such as cisgender, genderqueer, nonbinary, and transgender. Finally, we will grapple with the current debate about whether to abolish gender or to richly celebrate gender diversity.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 4153
class title: Topics in Feminist Media Arts
description: Fall 2024 Topic: Feminist Posthumanisms in Visual Arts. While feminist art in new media address traditional feminist concerns such as the female body, identity, representation, feminist history, and consumerism, others directly engage with recent theoretical currents on the Anthropocene, posthumanism, and new materialisms that view humans and non-humans as co-dependent. Non-humans include environmental factors, animals, plants, bacteria, and machines. This seminar will examine work by contemporary artists from various geographical areas and cultural traditions engaged with posthumanist perspectives in relation to relevant theoretical texts and previous feminist media arts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 4212
class title: Black Women's Autobiography in the 21st Century WritingHerStory
description: Black women first began to shape the genre of autobiography during antebellum era slavery. They were prolific in developing the genre of autobiography throughout the twentieth century, to the point of emerging as serial autobiographers in the case of Maya Angelou. Significantly, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1970), the first autobiography of six by Angelou, along with autobiographies by a range of other black women writers, helped to launch the renaissance in black women's literature and criticism in African American literature during the 1970s. In this course, we will focus on how black women have continued to write and share their personal stories in the new millennium by examining autobiographies that they have produced in the first years of the twenty-first century. More broadly, we will consider the impact of this writing on twenty-first century African American literature, as well as African diasporan writing in Africa and the Caribbean. In the process, we will draw on a range of critical and theoretical perspectives.  We will read memoirs and autobiographies by a range of figures, including Michelle Obama, Jennifer Lewis, Monica Coleman, Serena Williams, Gabrielle Union, and Tiffany Haddish, among others. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 4260
class title: Gender and Media
description: This seminar addresses the intersection of communication, culture, and identity through an examination of gender and the U.S. media system. After introducing students to key approaches to studying gender and mediated communication, the course will cover topics in four subunits: (1). Mediated representations of gender, sexuality, and intersectionality; (2). Diversity in media industries and gendered labor markets; (3). Gendered audiences and fan cultures; and (4). Gender, power, and identity in a digital era of communication. We will explore these topics through literature from sociology, communication and media studies, cultural studies, feminist theory, and internet/new media studies.
outcome: Students will be able to interpret key theories and methods of studying media, power, and social identities., Students will be able to examine the role of media in constructing gender and its intersections with race, ethnicity, class, and sexuality., Students will be able to recognize the importance of diversity in media industries., Students will be able to address the role of new media technologies in challenging and/or reaffirming traditional constructions of gender., Students will be able to develop critical thinking, writing, and analytic skills through the production of an original research paper., Students will be able to become more responsible consumers—and future producers—of media texts and imagery., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: FGSS 4371
class title: Sociology of Sex and Gender
description: This course provides an introduction to the theoretical and empirical literature on the sociology of sex and gender. The readings cover theory and methods, feminism, masculinity, intersectionality, international/comparative perspectives, gender roles, and recent sociological research in this area.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: FGSS 4491
class title: Feminism and Philosophy
description: Feminist approaches to questions in metaphysics, epistemology, language, and value theory.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one philosophy course or one course in feminist theory (FGSS).

class: FGSS 4695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 4835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FGSS 4990
class title: Senior Honors Thesis I
description: To graduate with honors, FGSS majors must complete a senior thesis under the supervision of an FGSS faculty member and defend that thesis orally before an honors committee. To be eligible for honors, students must have at least a cumulative GPA of 3.3 in all course work and a 3.5 average in all courses applying to their FGSS major. Students interested in the honors program should consult the DUS late in the spring semester of their junior year or very early in the fall semester of their senior year.

class: FGSS 6153
class title: Topics in Feminist Media Arts
description: Fall 24 Topic: Feminist Posthumanisms in Visual Arts. While feminist art in new media address traditional feminist concerns such as the female body, identity, representation, feminist history, and consumerism, others directly engage with recent theoretical currents on the Anthropocene, posthumanism, and new materialisms that view humans and non-humans as co-dependent. Non-humans include environmental factors, animals, plants, bacteria, and machines. This seminar will examine work by contemporary artists from various geographical areas and cultural traditions engaged with posthumanist perspectives in relation to relevant theoretical texts and previous feminist media arts.

class: FGSS 6312
class title: Synthesizing Pop: Electronics and the Musical Imagination
description: From Switched-On Bach to Synthpop and EDM, since the late 1960s electronic synthesizers have expanded the sonic palette and identity formation of popular musicians, leading to new concepts of sound and performance as well as communal, technological, and human interfaces. This course will explore the cultural history of analog synthesizers and their progeny of digital devices (samplers, sequencers, drum machines) and desktop technologies that revolutionized popular music soundscapes and embodiment. Synthesis will be considered as both a musical technology and theoretical concept that together spark imagined cyborg identities and post-human futures, challenging and resynthesizing categories of gender, sexuality, and race. Student will also have the opportunity to engage with Cornell's Robert Moog Archive and develop research, creative, or curation projects. This course is open to graduate students and fourth-year undergraduates by permission. Undergraduates should contact the instructor before enrolling.

class: FGSS 6554
class title: Modernist Fiction and the Erotics of Style
description: "I am interested in language because it wounds or seduces me," the critic Roland Barthes once wrote. How do we take pleasure in a text, even when it appears to betray us? How do we speak of the erotics of style beyond the mere thematic interpretation of sexual representation? Has such an erotics even been written yet? To explore a methodology for contemplating this elusive embrace between the aesthetic and the erotic, we will consider influential works of psychoanalytic, deconstructive, feminist, and queer theory alongside a survey of great modernist novelists whose innovative experiments in prose style have proved most sensual and most challenging, among them Oscar Wilde, Henry James, Gertrude Stein, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Ronald Firbank, and Djuna Barnes.

class: FGSS 6561
class title: Politics and Joy in Black Women's Writing
description: This course will look at how Black women writers negotiated enslavement, Reconstruction, and Jim Crow era segregation while also managing to find avenues of joy, escapism, and a certain kind of freedom through art-making. In addition to reading primary texts by Phillis Wheatley, Hannah Bond, Jessie Redmon Fauset, and others we will also look at critical and theoretical work by Hortense Spillers, Saidiyah Hartman, Barbara Fields, and Karen Fields.

class: FGSS 6721
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground. We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender. 

class: FGSS 6835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.

class: FGSS 6990
class title: Topics in Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
description: Independent reading course for graduate students on topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students develop a course of readings in consultation with a faculty member in the field of Feminist, Gender, &amp; Sexuality Studies who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: FINN 1121
class title: Elementary Finnish I
description: The Elementary Finnish I course is designed for students without prior knowledge of Finnish. Students have an opportunity to practice listening, speaking, reading and writing in Finnish. Students learn to provide information about their opinions and feelings, their families, their immediate environment and their daily activities. The course is taught in Finnish.

class: FREN 1210
class title: Elementary French
description: FREN 1210-FREN 1220 is a two-semester sequence.  FREN 1210 is the first half of the sequence designed to provide a thorough grounding in French language and an introduction to intercultural competence.  French is used in contextualized, meaningful activities to provide practice in speaking, listening, reading, and writing.  Development of analytical skills for grammar leads students toward greater autonomy as language learners.  Students develop their writing skills by writing and editing compositions.  Readings are varied and include literary texts.  Daily preparation and active participation are required.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: FREN 1230
class title: Continuing French
description: FREN 1230 is an all-skills course designed to improve oral communication, listening comprehension, and reading ability, to establish a groundwork for correct writing, and to provide a substantial grammar review. The approach in the course encourages the student to see the language within the context of its culture.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 1220 or an LPF score of 45-55 or SAT II 490-590.

class: FREN 2070
class title: Medical French
description: This course is specifically designed for premed students and students at large with an interest in medical related topics who wish to be better equipped with language skills that will enable them to convey more empathy and multicultural sensitivity while communicating with diverse patient populations throughout the Francophone world.  This course aims as well to prepare students to engage in global health equity and promote awareness of language barriers in today's medical field, both domestically and abroad. This is a mid-intermediate level course, and as such, it will continue to develop and reinforce writing, reading, speaking, listening and presentational skills via an array of communicative tasks based on real-life situations.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 1230, LPF score 56-64, SAT II 600-680, or AP French language 4, or CASE Q.

class: FREN 2090
class title: French Intermediate Composition and Conversation I
description: This intermediate-level course is designed for students who want to focus on their speaking and writing skills. Emphasis is placed on strengthening of grammar skills, expansion of vocabulary and discourse levels to increase communicative fluency and accuracy. The course also provides continued reading and listening practice as well as development of effective language learning strategies.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 1230, LPF score 56-64, or SAT II 600-680 or AP French language 4, or CASE Q.

class: FREN 2095
class title: French Intermediate Composition and Conversation II
description: This advanced-intermediate course is highly recommended for students planning to study abroad as it aims to develop the writing and speaking skills needed to function in a French speaking university environment. A comprehensive review of fundamental and advanced grammatical structures is integrated with the study of selected texts (short stories, literary excerpts, poems, articles from French periodicals, videos) all chosen for thematic or cultural interest. Students write weekly papers, participate in class discussions of the topics at hand, and give at least one oral presentation in class.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2070, FREN 2080, or FREN 2090 or CASE Q+.

class: FREN 2270
class title: Versions of Versailles
description: The palace of Versailles has been an object of fascination for over three hundred years.  A place of splendor and squalor Versailles has been identified with French culture as the epitome of elegance and grace from Louis XIV to Karl Lagerfeld.  It has also been the scene of scandal and tragedy.  This course will examine the importance the reality and mythology of Versailles has played across the centuries and across the world.  We will examine the construction, the art, architecture, garden construction music and social history of the palace and its place both in Absolutist France and in our contemporary world.  Using movies, reproductions or art and architecture as well as revealing the secrets of its sexual politics and murderous plots we will attempt to understand why the fascination of the greatest of all palaces continues to draw millions of visitors each year trying to discover its grandeur and decadence.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: FREN 2310
class title: Introduction to French and Francophone Literature and Culture
description: This course, designed to follow FREN 2095, introduces students to an array of literary and visual material from the French and Francophone world.  It aims to develop students' proficiency in critical writing and thinking, as well as presenting students with the vocabulary and tools of literary and visual analysis.  Each section of FREN 2310 will have a different focus-for example, colonialism and the other, or the importance of women and sexual minorities in French and Francophone history, performance in literature and film, or image and narrative-but all sections of FREN 2310 will emphasize through writing assignments and in-class discussions, the development of those linguistic and conceptual tools necessary for cultural and critical fluency.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2095 or CASE Q++ or permission of instructor required.

class: FREN 2692
class title: Thinking Difference in the 21st Century
description: This course adopts an interdisciplinary lens to reflect on how we can think difference productively in our current global condition, through examining some of the challenges that traditionally normative legislative systems (French secularism, shari'a laws in Francophone muslim countries) come up against when faced with increasingly multi-ethnic and pluralistic societies. We will examine a wide array of contemporary issues in the French metropole and the Francophone sphere, as well as their particular histories. Combining an interdisciplinary approach, we will look at a set of current events, legislations, and public debates, such as the burqa ban, terrorism, the same-sex marriage debate (marriage pour tous), and immigration 'queston'.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2095 or permission of instructor.

class: FREN 3120
class title: French Stylistics
description: Part theory, part textual analysis, and part creative writing, this course aims to help students develop a richer, more nuanced understanding and command of both the spoken and written language. As students refine their understanding of style and learn techniques for characterizing stylistic varieties, they apply these concepts both to the reading of a singular (and yet very plural) literary text. Raymond Queneau's Exercices de style, and to the writing of new exercices de style of their own. We also consider the relevance of stylistics to translation and of translation to Queneau's text.  Seminar-style participation in class discussions and activities is expected.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2180 or CASE Q++ or permission of instructor.

class: FREN 3460
class title: Intellectuals: A French History
description: The concept of "intellectual" - the writer or scholar who takes a political commitment - was born in France at the end of the nineteenth century. From the Dreyfus Affaire to the recent polemics on French "identity," passing through Vichy, the Algerian War and May 68, intellectuals established a symbiotic relationship between culture and politics, becoming a sort of national brand, object of both admiration and contempt outside of the country. The aim of this course is to revisit some crucial moments of this history, focusing on different attempts to define the nature and function of the intellectual, from Emile Zola to Jean-Paul Sartre, from Simone de Beavoir to Michel Foucault.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2310 or CASE Q++ or permission of instructor required.

class: FREN 3525
class title: Bodies in Medicine
description: Literature offers valuable perspectives on medicine and the human body that help us focus on the humanity of the individual who is the object of medical interventions. This focus often occurs as a result of carefully chosen languages that can be seen as constituting a poetics of the body. In this course, we will examine the poetics of the body in a range of literary, philosophical, and scientific works. We will explore how literary authors revise or rework medical representations of the body and of the individual in order to evoke the value and complexity of the human body.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2310 or permission of instructor.

class: FREN 3560
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: FREN 3685
class title: Feminism and Islam in North Africa
description: The course is a survey of Feminist Islamic thinkers from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, and their diaspora, featuring both French and Arabic texts in English translation. The purpose of the course is to critically explore the competing treatment of major gendered tropes in a Muslim context (the veil, the harem, polygamy, etc.) by North African thinkers, through their examination of qur'anic surats/hadiths, the evolution of tafsirs (tradion of qur'anic exegesis) as well as their conflicting approaches to secular western feminism. Readings might include: Fatema Mernissi, Asmaa Lamrabet, Qasim Amin, Naguib Mahfoud, Assia Djebar, Mona Eltahawy, and Nawal El-Saadawi.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FREN 3750
class title: Ecofeminisms and Wonder Stories in the Francophone World
description: This course will introduce students to the contemporary ecofeminist theories which are being developed in the francophone world today in parallel with the analysis of different case studies, using literary, philosophical, scientific French and Francophone works. The course seeks to look at some of the engendered frameworks that have led to political, sociological and ecological impasses and explores how solutions to ethical, environmental and economical problems may require a feminist perspective. The goal of the course is to open a dialogue between these works, as they represent, symbolize, translate the so-called "universal" knowledge of the Western World and the emerging "situated knowledges of the "Other Non Western World."
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FREN 2310, or CASE Q++, or permission of instructor required.

class: FREN 3840
class title: Occupied France Through Film
description: The Second World War and the Occupation of France by German forces had a traumatic impact on the nation's identity. We will examine the way France has tried to deal with this conflicted period through a series of films that each deal, directly or indirectly with the major questions posed by history to French "memory" of the Occupation. What was the role of collaboration, resistance, anti-Semitism, of writers and intellectuals during this traumtic period? How has film helped to define and re-shape the ways in which France has come to terms with its conflicted past?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FREN 4140
class title: Thinking With Montaigne: The Essays in The History of Philosophy and Theory
description: Western modernity and humanism have been the target of decisive critique over the past decades in philosophy and theory.  But these trends are not contemporary in any simple sense; they have strange affinities with the premodern modes of writing and thinking put forth in the Essays (1580-95) of Michel de Montaigne. This seminar interrogates the contemporaneity of Montaigne by rereading the Essays in dialogue with influential philosophers and theorists, such as Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Hegel, Nietzsche, Freud, Adorno, Heidegger, Levi-Strauss, Foucault, Deleuze, Agamben, Derrida, and Haraway.  While studying Montaigne's untimely place in intellectual history, we will examine related aesthetic modes and explore how the unprecedented (anti)philosophical gesture of the Essay resonates with posthumanist styles and questions in ecological thought, philosophy, politics, and indigenous studies.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: FREN 4190
class title: Special Topics in French Literature
description: Guided independent study of special topics.

class: FREN 4290
class title: Honors Work in French
description: Consult director of undergraduate studies for more information.

class: FREN 4368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG, LA-AG)

class: FREN 4745
class title: Romantic Quests, Imperial Conquests
description: The course will propose a parallel reading of some of the most famous texts of romantic literature with texts less known in order to develop and challenge both the canon of literary history but also to extend the field of romantic studies beyond purely literary concerns and geographies. Taking as a starting point Harold Bloom's famous definition of Romanticism as "the internalization of romance, particularly of the quest" we propose to scrutinize some of these canonical works. Texts to be read could include Stendhal's Le rouge et le noir, Germaine de Staël's Corinne ou l'Italie, Chateaubriand's Atala, Flora Tristan PéIrégrinations d'une noir, George Sand's Indiana, Suzanne Voilquin, Mémoires d une fille du peuple en Egypte, Louise Michel's L'ère nouvelle.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)

class: FREN 6140
class title: Thinking With Montaigne: The Essays in The History of Philosophy and Theory
description: Western modernity and humanism have been the target of decisive critique over the past decades in philosophy and theory.  But these trends are not contemporary in any simple sense; they have strange affinities with the premodern modes of writing and thinking put forth in the Essays (1580-95) of Michel de Montaigne. This seminar interrogates the contemporaneity of Montaigne by rereading the Essays in dialogue with influential philosophers and theorists, such as Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Hegel, Nietzsche, Freud, Adorno, Heidegger, Levi-Strauss, Foucault, Deleuze, Agamben, Derrida, and Haraway.  While studying Montaigne's untimely place in intellectual history, we will examine related aesthetic modes and explore how the unprecedented (anti)philosophical gesture of the Essay resonates with posthumanist styles and questions in ecological thought, philosophy, politics, and indigenous studies.

class: FREN 6368
class title: Reading Édouard Glissant
description: This seminar will focus on the writings of the polymorphous Martinican poet and thinker, Édouard Glissant (1928-2011).  We will attend to the historical context of French colonialism, particularly in the Caribbean, that gives his writing part of its impetus and to the anticolonial intellectuals with whom he engages (chiefly Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon) as well as to his major self-professed influences (William Faulkner, Saint-John Perse, Hegel) and to an array of interlocutors and fellow-travelers as well as a few dissenters. The seminar will examine the main preoccupations of Glissant's writing (world histories of dispossession and plantation slavery, creolization, Relation, opacity, flux, transversality, Caribbean landscapes as figures of thought, the All-World, etc.) but our focus will be on reading Glissant and attending carefully to the implications of his poetics and of his language for decolonial thought. 

class: FREN 6390
class title: Special Topics in French Literature
description: Guided independent study for graduate students.

class: FREN 6424
class title: Beauty, Grief
description: This course is for anyone drawn to beauty-and anyone who, within the beautiful, finds the trace of a loss. What do we grieve, what do we miss, when we find ourselves in the presence of beauty? And what, in every retrospective, prospective or otherwise non-present beauty, do we nonetheless crave and nonetheless mourn? What is the beauty hidden within mourning? We'll take a look at thinkers, poets, and artists from both modern and premodern culture, potentially including Anne Carson, Augustine of Hippo, Fra Angelico, Gillian Rose, Hervé Guibert, Pepe Espáliu, and others, as we try to sit with dual summons of beauty and grief: beauty or grief.

class: FSAD 1140
class title: Principles of Design Computing
description: The course will cover foundational skills and best practices for design communication in terms of the underlying principles of computing technologies. This course will help students become versatile in utilizing various approaches and tools for tasks in Design and Environmental Analysis (DEA) and Fiber Science &amp; Apparel Design (FSAD) programs. The first module will cover the foundations of 2D graphics and technical drawing. The second module will be an introduction to 3D modeling and rendering. Each module will start as one class with a focus on general principles and will be followed by the class dividing into two sections for applications specific to DEA and FSAD programs. The final module will include an introduction to Generative Artificial Intelligence techniques as a part of a collaborative final project where students will work in multidisciplinary teams to design, curate, and propose an exhibition (DEA) for a fashion collection (FSAD). Through lectures, class activities, homework and projects, the course will help students build confidence in digital design skills and be encouraged to explore further on their own.
outcome: Foundational skills in 2D and 3D digital media for design communication., Critical thinking in design communication., Put principles and elements of design into practice., 

class: FSAD 1170
class title: Fashion Graphics
description: Students develop both familiar and unfamiliar methods that enable them to visualize the fashioned body and ancillary expressions of fashion. Fashion graphics is explored as a communicative strategy essential in most aspects of fashion development.
outcome: Demonstrate flexible and oblique thinking., Use image-making in its broadest sense., Use image-making as a research tool and a means of self-expression., Uncover a method of image-making that is contemporary., Generate a series of new approaches to fashion image making., Experiment with broad concepts of invention and presentation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: demonstrated skill at drawing.

class: FSAD 1250
class title: Fashion, Art and Design Thinking
description: Introduction to the visual arts and design that explores aesthetic and cross-cultural dimensions of fashion as a visual, material, and embodied practice. Lectures emphasize the intersections between fashion, art, and design through slide presentations, historical artifacts from the Cornell Fashion + Textile Collection, hands-on activities, and discussions. We consider social, cultural, political, aesthetic, scientific, economic, and historical aspects of fashion design, visual expression, and everyday embodied dressing.
outcome: Enhance their ability to think visually, and communicate ideas in visual ways., Become familiar with the principles and elements of design, and be able to use design language to discuss and evaluate designed objects., Learn about the different media of fine arts and design, and understand the limitations and opportunities offered to the designer by various materials, techniques, and technologies., Understand important changes in fine arts, decorative arts, and design as they have occurred in various cultural, economic, and social contexts across time., Approach design from a critical perspective that centers questions of justice, equity, and inclusion., 

class: FSAD 1450
class title: Introduction to Fashion Design
description: This course covers the principles of garment assembly and flat-patternmaking for apparel design, as well as the use of mass production equipment and methods to analyze, develop, and assemble garments. Studio projects include an emphasis on innovative design and high-quality garment assembly techniques for upscale markets.
outcome: Develop basic fashion design and flat-patternmaking skills to prepare for further coursework in fashion design., Expand knowledge and skills with industrial garment construction methods., Create designer-quality garment for portfolios and display., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: FSAD 1170 and FSAD 1250.

class: FSAD 2310
class title: Fashion Product Management
description: This course is an overview of the fashion supply chain with emphasis on the U.S. apparel industry. Students will learn key concepts for managing the development, marketing, and distribution of fashion products including consumer behavior, trend forecasting, brand management, merchandise planning, and multi-channel distribution.
outcome: Describe the interaction between producers, retailers, and consumers in the apparel supply chain., Critically analyze the apparel product development process in view of current economic and social concerns., Formulate marketing, merchandising, and costing strategies for fashion products., 

class: FSAD 2370
class title: Structural Fabric Design
description: This course provides a basic understanding of how fabrics are formed and the relationship between fabric structure and fabric performance. Students completing this class will have a strong understanding of common fabric structures, be able to identify fabric structure visually and appreciate the relationship between fabric construction and performance in apparel and other end uses.
outcome: Master the vocabulary of textile structures from fiber through finished fabric., Understand the basic processes used to form common textile materials., Learn to represent fabrics graphically and understand the relationship between actual fabric structures and computer drawings., Be able to identify the structure of a given fabric visually and describe that fabric using standard diagramming (graphing) techniques, notation and language., Calculate basic fabric properties such as cover and fabric weight., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 1350 or permisson of instructor.

class: FSAD 2650
class title: Creative Patternmaking for Fashion Design
description: The goal of this apparel studio course is to expand student confidence and competencies in flat pattern analysis, design, and fitting techniques. In this course, students learn the basic principles and methods of 2D flat patternmaking as well as creative patternmaking concepts. Exercises, assignments, and projects are designed to teach the knowledge and skills needed to create well-balanced and quality patterns for 3D garment designs. 2D/3D CAD technology for patternmaking and fit testing is introduced.
outcome: Demonstrate an understanding of basic and advanced pattern making techniques by completing exercises and projects., Create innovative and contemporary designs suitable for design competitions and exhibitions., Identify visual clues on garment fit and make corrections to improve fit on the dress form and on the body by going from 2D -3D and 3D-2D., Analyze garment images and technical sketches to generate patterns with exact proportions and details., Build your own aesthetics through design and construction practice., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 1450, and FSAD 1140 or FSAD 1250.

class: FSAD 3200
class title: Global Textile and Apparel Sustainability
description: This course explores sustainability in the textile and apparel industries in relation to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals articulated by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Students will engage with industry challenges, practices, and successes in increasing sustainability via guest speakers, case studies, research reports and corporate reports.  Aspects of sustainability impacting personal welfare of producers and consumers, environmental impacts and economic potential will be explored.
outcome: Explain multiple aspects of sustainability for the textile, apparel, and interior design industries., Use the United Nations sustainability goals to interpret sustainability claims articulated by products or companies., Compare sustainability program costs and benefits for specific products or companies., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, PBS-HE, SBA-HE) (CA-AG, OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: FSAD 3250
class title: Color and Surface Design of Textiles
description: Studio experience in the surface design of textiles combined with exercises in color theory. Textile projects use techniques such as natural dyes, block printing, silk painting, shibori, silk screen, and embroidery to produce a portfolio of textile designs. Studio work is augmented by lectures on pattern and color theory illustrated by slides and textile examples.
outcome: Develop a better understanding of the principles of color in design., Apply these principles to the surface design of textiles., Learn techniques of textile surface design: natural dyes; silk screen (direct, resist and discharge printing);  tied, stitched, and clamped resist dyeing (shibori); embroidery; and block printing., Produce a surface designed length of yardage sufficient for a garment (3 yards)., Develop a portfolio of surface design work., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: FSAD 1140 and FSAD 1350.

class: FSAD 3770
class title: Experimental Fashion
description: The collection course provides opportunity for students to analyze information gathered from previous experiences and in the course to be used as visual meta narrative in the creation of a collection of fashion related objects. Objects must respond to, and satisfy a global design challenge of 'importance'. Using design for clothes, textiles, jewelry, shoes, accessories, photography, film, moving image, blog, fashion forecasting, visual journalism, fashion styling, show direction, or other fashion promotional aspect relating to the fashion industries. The primary ambition of the course is to build a range of high-level skills in the students' chosen sector, medium, or media.
outcome: Convey an aesthetic that is transferable among different artifact types., Produce a collection targeted at distinct market sectors., Have opinions about the local and global state of fashion., Discuss fashion design beyond visual representation., Work with appropriate methods at all stages of design developments., Use fabrics, finishes, and fittings to achieve a desired intention., Conceptualize themes and apply them to big ideas., Employ a developmental process that benefits rich idea generation., Solve challenges., Use your personal signature to inspire., 

class: FSAD 4000
class title: Directed Reading
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent reading by and individual student or a group of students in a field of FSAD not otherwise provided through course work in the department or elsewhere at the university.

class: FSAD 4010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves data collection and analysis, or laboratory or studio projects by an individual student or a group of students in a field of FSAD not otherwise provided through course work in the department or elsewhere at the university.

class: FSAD 4020
class title: Supervised Fieldwork
description: For study that involves both responsible participation in a community setting and reflection on that experience through discussion, reading, and writing by an individual student or a group of students in a field of FSAD not otherwise provided through course work in the department or elsewhere at the university. 

class: FSAD 4025
class title: Design for Change: Imagining Decolonial Futures
description: This course explores the role of design in reshaping the world towards social justice and sustainability. Designing for change requires creating different cultural patterns and worldviews — examining taken-for-granted assumptions, narratives, and myths of the hegemonic cultural model (known as Modernity) that limit our capacity to imagine the world differently. As the world is enmeshed in colossal interconnected crises, it seems that imagination has been funneled to two avenues: techno-solutions to the symptoms of the crises and dystopic futures. This course explores two main ideas: a) alternatives are possible, b) the area of design for change would benefit from exchanges with different cultures and knowledge systems. Designing decolonial futures is about weaving together knowledge from multiple cultures, thus recognizing and creating alternatives based on different ways of understanding the world.
outcome: Students will be able to understand what is at stake in the international movement to "decolonize design" and the importance of detaching design from the assumptions, promises, and values of Modernity/Coloniality to generate significant change. Students will be introduced to the main theories and approaches used in decolonial design: decoloniality, pluriversality, epistemologies of the South, transition discourses/design, speculative design, and design for social innovation., Students will be able to recognize structural features of the Eurocentric Modernity at the root of social inequities and unsustainability (which connect social and environmental crises). Without examining these structures, designers keep trying to solve the symptoms instead of addressing the causes. Particularly, students will reflect upon the legacy of colonialism on society and the natural environment., Students will be able to recognize that narratives frame the way we design. Creating different futures requires new narratives and visions to reframe the design practice and the meaning of technological innovations. Students will be asked to create new narratives to reframe their design practice/research., Students will be able to recognize taken-for-granted assumptions and myths of Modernity that hinder the understanding of other cultures, epistemologies, and ontologies—i.e., even when designers want to listen to the Other, the understanding is very limited. Therefore this course aims to enhance the student's capacity to listen to and collaborate with people from other cultures— recognizing and respecting differences in worldviews, cultural patterns, ways of knowing—to generate change., Students will be asked to create compelling visual communications, knowledge visualizations, and narratives to communicate the topics discussed in class and their visions of alternative futures to other people. The creative outputs will be assembled into an exhibit that will take place in one of CHE galleries and on a website., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, HA-HE, LAD-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG)

class: FSAD 4030
class title: Teaching Apprenticeship
description: For study that includes teaching methods in the field and assisting faculty with instruction.

class: FSAD 4370
class title: Knitwear Design and Other Knit Applications
description: This course covers the design and creation of knit garments and other knit products via a variety of machine-knit shaping techniques. Students will work on hand-flat and electronic software driven machines to program and create shaped knit panels for a variety end-uses. Draping, blocking, and linking techniques will be covered. Students are required to develop design ideas via mood board and sketchbook research and to make verbal/visual presentations of their work at regular critiques. Students will have access to equipment and supplies such as yarn, but should expect to purchase bring in supplies such as drawing materials, scissors, a tape measure and dot grid notebook.
outcome: Learn a range of knit shaping techniques including fully fashioned garments, flechage (short rowing), and knit structure variation., Develop the skill of translating aesthetic design ideas into fabric and garments via an abstract mathematical process, including schematic drawings and knit textile specific vocabulary and instructions., Learn how to program shaped panels on the Apex 3 computer to be knit on the Shima Seiki electronic knitting machine., Enhanced design and critique skills from regular class critiques and presentations of your work., Learn draping techniques for knit fabrics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 3370.

class: FSAD 4460
class title: Nanotechnology in Fibers and Textiles
description: This course covers the development of functional fibers and textiles thru nanotechnology. This course introduces nanomaterials, nano-finishes and nanocoating processes used for functional fibers and textiles. This course also emphasizes the structure-property of the nanofibers and nanotextiles and predict their end-use. Examples of nanotechnological products based on nanofibers and nanotextiles in the market are included. This course also discusses environmental issues and the sustainability aspects regard to nanotechnology used in fibers and textiles. Through lectures, readings, discussion, projects and presentations, this course highlights the role of nanotechnology for the development of functional fibers and textiles.
outcome: Understand the role of nanotechnology for the development of functional fibers and textiles., Be familiar with the nanomaterials, nanofinishes, and nanocoating processes used in fibers and textiles., Interpret scientific data to evaluate the functionality of nanofibers and nanotextiles., Select and apply appropriate nanotechnologies for fibers and textiles for specific performance and functionality., Predict the end-use of nanofibers and nanotextiles in relation with their structure-property., Discuss the environmental issues and the sustainability aspects regard to nanotechnology used in fibers and textiles., Propose new ideas to develop functional fibers and textiles by applying nanotechnology., Build teamwork skills, scientific writing skills, and oral/poster presentation skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 1350 and FSAD 1360 and FSAD 3350, or ENGRI 1200/AEP 1200, or MSE 2610 or MSE 3010, or equivalent.

class: FSAD 4660
class title: Textiles, Apparel, and Innovation
description: Designed for students in all FSAD options. Explores the relationship between materials and design with a concentration on the use of innovative textile materials in apparel. Both aesthetic and functional issues are addressed. The course consists of a combination of lectures, discussion of readings, oral reports, a research paper, and project work. The class engages elders from the local community to solve real-life problems using design thinking methodologies.
outcome: Understand technical specifications for fibrous materials., Select appropriate materials for specific performance requirements., Perform calculations regarding fiber and fabric properties and predict the properties of these materials under specific conditions., Learn to present project information graphically in a poster format as well as orally., Perform reverse engineering studies on fibrous materials and propose technical and design solutions to performance issues., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 1360 and FSAD 2370.

class: FSAD 4770
class title: Negotiated Fashion
description: This second course builds on FSAD 3770; students must retain the big ideas and themes developed in the first course. Motifs will be finalized and applied to collections. The primary ambition is to demonstrate a range of expert skills necessary to articulate and operate as creator and director of fashion within the global fashion system. Students will consolidate previous explorations and experiences to create a philosophical position about fashion driven by concept. Objects and scenarios will be completed to a "professional standard" worthy of exhibition at an international 'young creator' level. Much of the course will be spent developing concepts, proposing ideas and finally fabricating fashion objects that are relevant to fashion markets 6 months hence.
outcome: Utilize a personal design philosophy and market dictates to create a range of culturally important artifacts., Innovate their practice and strategically attenuate it in terms of competition, creative and commercial., Organize and act upon what is important to fashion sensibilities for the market they operate., Finalize experimentation and practice design and understand fashion at a professional level., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: FSAD 3770.

class: FSAD 4990
class title: Honors Thesis Research
description: The student prepares a thesis, based on independent research, including a research statement, background, approach, results (which could be a description of a creative work), and discussion. The student may also produce creative work. Students make an open presentation of work, either a seminar or an exhibition, and an oral defense with the committee. Interested students should obtain a FSAD Honors Program application form from the FSAD undergraduate office (T57 HEB) and submit the application to the department before the end of the fall semester of junior year. For more information students should contact the Director of Undergraduate Studies at fsad-dus@cornell.edu.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: minimum GPA of 3.3.

class: FSAD 6000
class title: Special Problems for Graduate Students
description: Independent advanced work by graduate students recommended by their chair and approved by the department chair and instructor.

class: FSAD 6025
class title: Design for Change: Imagining Decolonial Futures
description: This course explores the role of design in reshaping the world towards social justice and sustainability. Designing for change requires creating different cultural patterns and worldviews — examining taken-for-granted assumptions, narratives, and myths of the hegemonic cultural model (known as Modernity) that limit our capacity to imagine the world differently. As the world is enmeshed in colossal interconnected crises, it seems that imagination has been funneled to two avenues: techno-solutions to the symptoms of the crises and dystopic futures. This course explores two main ideas: a) alternatives are possible, b) the area of design for change would benefit from exchanges with different cultures and knowledge systems. Designing decolonial futures is about weaving together knowledge from multiple cultures, thus recognizing and creating alternatives based on different ways of understanding the world.
outcome: Students will be able to understand what is at stake in the international movement to "decolonize design" and the importance of detaching design from the assumptions, promises, and values of Modernity/Coloniality to generate significant change. Students will be introduced to the main theories and approaches used in decolonial design: decoloniality, pluriversality, epistemologies of the South, transition discourses/design, speculative design, and design for social innovation., Students will be able to recognize structural features of the Eurocentric Modernity at the root of social inequities and unsustainability (which connect social and environmental crises). Without examining these structures, designers keep trying to solve the symptoms instead of addressing the causes. Particularly, students will reflect upon the legacy of colonialism on society and the natural environment., Students will be able to recognize that narratives frame the way we design. Creating different futures requires new narratives and visions to reframe the design practice and the meaning of technological innovations. Students will be asked to create new narratives to reframe their design practice/research., Students will be able to recognize taken-for-granted assumptions and myths of Modernity that hinder the understanding of other cultures, epistemologies, and ontologies—i.e., even when designers want to listen to the Other, the understanding is very limited. Therefore this course aims to enhance the student's capacity to listen to and collaborate with people from other cultures— recognizing and respecting differences in worldviews, cultural patterns, ways of knowing—to generate change., Students will be asked to create compelling visual communications, knowledge visualizations, and narratives to communicate the topics discussed in class and their visions of alternative futures to other people. The creative outputs will be assembled into an exhibit that will take place in one of CHE galleries and on a website., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, HA-HE, LAD-HE)

class: FSAD 6460
class title: Nanotechnology in Fibers and Textiles
description: This course covers the development of functional fibers and textiles by nanotechnology. This course introduces nanomaterials, nano-finishes and nanocoating processes used for functional fibers and textiles. This course also emphasizes the structure-property of the nanofibers and nanotextiles and predict their end-use. Examples of nanotechnological products based on nanofibers and nanotextiles in the market are included. This course also discusses environmental issues and the sustainability aspects regard to nanotechnology used in fibers and textiles. Through lectures, readings, discussion, projects and presentations, this course highlights the role of nanotechnology for the development of functional fibers and textiles.
outcome: Understand the role of nanotechnology for the development of functional fibers and textiles., Be familiar with the nanomaterials, nanofinishes, and nanocoating processes used in fibers and textiles, Interpret scientific data to evaluate the functionality of nanofibers and nanotextiles., Select and apply appropriate nanotechnologies for fibers and textiles for specific performance and functionality., Predict the end-use of nanofibers and nanotextiles in relation with their structure-property., Discuss the environmental issues and the sustainability aspects regard to nanotechnology used in fibers and textiles., Propose new ideas to develop functional fibers and textiles by applying nanotechnology., Build teamwork skills, scientific writing skills, and oral/poster presentation skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Required prerequisite: FSAD 1350 and FSAD 1360 and FSAD 3350 or equivalent or ENGRI 1200/AEP 1200, MSE 2610, MSE 3010 or equivalent.

class: FSAD 8990
class title: Master's Thesis and Research
description: A course for Fiber Science or Apparel Design Graduate Students doing research related to completing their Master's degree.

class: FSAD 9990
class title: Doctoral Thesis and Research
description: Dissertation research for PhD candidates in Fiber Science or Apparel Design.

class: GDEV 1102
class title: Introduction to Global Development
description: This course introduces students to the history of the idea of Development and to key definitions, theories, measures and debates in the study and practice of Global Development. We draw upon a variety of disciplines to address some of the "big questions" of this field: What is Development? How do we measure Development? Why are some countries (and people) poorer than others? Who are the key actors in the field of Global Development and how have they changed over time? What are some promising Development interventions? How should we think about our own role in Development?
outcome: Define constructs including "Development", "poverty", "inequality", "inequity", and "justice.", Analyze the role of colonialism in shaping power relationships between "developing and "developed" countries and how these historical relationships shape the Development paradigm., Identify a range of indicators used to measure Development (i.e., GDP, HDI, Happiness, etc.)  and identify their assumptions and limitations., Describe the current Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) project and targets., Examine some current datasets on Development (i.e., World Development Indicators, etc.), Compare the basic assumptions, arguments, and perspectives of Modernization Theory, Dependency Theory, World Systems Theory, and Neoliberalism., Map the range of actors that participate in the Development project (the state, the market, civil society, etc.) and the different roles they have played over time., Explain how a variety of fields have approached Development projects, and what factors they tend to emphasize (i.e., sociology, economics, political science, demography, natural/physical sciences)., Describe how Development projects are monitored and evaluated (i.e., how do we know "what worked") and the possibility of unintended consequences., Critically evaluate the ethics of "Development interventions," at home and abroad, and who gets to set the agenda and participate in these activities., 
distribution categories: (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 1105
class title: Global Development Cornerstone
description: The Global Development Cornerstone aims to create an intellectual community among Global Development students, and to assist with transitioning to, or from within, Cornell University. This course will offer opportunities for interaction and intellectual exploration with a cross-section of faculty, staff, and alumni in an effort to establish supportive and cooperative relationships. In addition, it will foster exploration into personal identity in the context of career exploration and introduce the breadth of activities and resources available to achieve a balance between academic, extracurricular, and interpersonal activities during their time in the major.
outcome: Describe what they can learn and experience in the Global Development Major., Describe the range of careers that Global Development can prepare them for., Construct a solid learning community with your academic peers., Identify your leadership and collaboration skills., Practice and apply your understanding of academic etiquette., Locate special programs available to you, such as internships, service-learning opportunities, student research, and student organizations., In appropriate situations, consider that some of the norms and practices one espouses and treats as "universal" might actually be culturally dependent., Explain Ezra Cornell's goal to "Found an institution where any person can find instruction in any study" by learning about opportunities for future Cornell classes within and outside the major., Communicate their portfolio of learning to others., 

class: GDEV 1200
class title: FWS: Topics in Global Development
description: The department offers first-year writing seminars on a wide range of global development topics. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: GDEV 1300
class title: Just Food: Exploring the Modern Food System
description: This course provides a comprehensive review of the modern food system from the green revolution to the industrialized model of today. It offers a critical perspective on existing paradigms and insights into alternative approaches for producing food security, environmental stewardship, and equity in an era of climate change. The course is taught by an interdisciplinary team of instructors who bring insights from both the biophysical and social sciences and will ask students to consider their food using a systems-thinking lens. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Describe key concepts across disciplines and perspectives related to the food system, including relationships between food, human society (including politics and culture), and the non-human environment., Describe some key historical and contemporary events, processes, and concepts that have shaped the current food system., Apply systems thinking to describe current key debates, concepts, trade-offs, and challenges in the food system from multiple perspectives., Communicate factual aspects of the impact of climate change on global food system., Evaluate assumptions and values about food systems that underpin one's own thinking and that of others, connect personal values and beliefs to diet and nutritional choices., Apply and synthesize scientific evidence in support of arguments that address food systems research questions., Analyze and critically evaluate food systems research results and policies for evidence-based assessments and ethical decision-making., Engage in respectful dialogue, collaborative teamwork, and problem-solving with those of differing viewpoints and backgrounds., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 2010
class title: Population and Social Change
description: Introduction to population studies. The primary focus is on the relationships between demographic processes (fertility, mortality, and immigration) and social and economic issues. Discussion covers special topics related to population growth and spatial distribution, including marriage and family formation, population aging, changing roles and statuses of women, labor force participation, immigrations, urban growth and urbanization, resource allocation, and the environment.
outcome: Understand and examine the determinants and consequences of demographic change, and components therein in the US and internationally., Examine the mutual interrelationships between population and society., Understand alternative policy approaches associated with challenges and opportunities presented by changing population size and composition., Utilize basic methodological approaches to population analysis., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 2100
class title: Introduction to Adult Learning
description: Do adults learn differently than do youth? This experiential and community-engaged course is for anyone interested in planning and facilitating adult, community and lifelong learning. As inquirers ourselves, we not only study principles, theories and methods, we also put into practice what we learn. One of the ways we do this is by incorporating adult learning approaches within the seminar's design and educational practice (andragogy, rather than pedagogy). Another way we apply what we study is by mentoring adult learners. Each student serves as a learning partner to a Cornell employee who is pursuing an educational aim. A journey of mutual learning is a satisfying and meaningful adventure. As employees' partners, we are co-learners and co-educators, recognizing that each person has knowledge and experience to bring to the quest. 
outcome: Explore the relationship of leadership and learning in formal, nonformal, and informal education in personal and larger contexts., Develop deep consciousness of one's own core values for the purpose of mindfully engaging with diverse others in constructive and respectful ways., Learn and apply foundational principles and processes of instructional design and demonstrate these in planning and facilitating lessons with an adult Learning Partner across differences in generation, nationality, language, class, and ethnicity., Examine trends of educational inequity in this country and ramifications in the lives of adults of poor schooling as children., Through historic and contemporary cases, unpack narratives of popular education in community development, public engagement, and social justice through formal, nonformal, and informal venues., Recognize that being an educator involves not only understanding issues of power, inequity, and access, but also entails conscious ethical practice in everyday decision-making., 
distribution categories: (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: GDEV 2305
class title: Planning for Change
description: This course will provide students with theoretical frameworks, practical tools, and methods of written expression needed to foster inclusive development practice. Beginning with perspectives on practitioner ethics, the course walks students through the life-cycle of a development interventions, from issue identification and project conceptualization, to planning and implementation, to monitoring and evaluation. Through analytic writing, students will use evidence to explore the dynamics of power which can lead to complex, and even contentious development outcomes. Several development practitioners will present case studies of their own work to provide lessons and examples upon which students will be able to draw.
outcome: Connect theories of development to predicaments in real-life development practice., Apply a range of professional skills and tools related to planning for and implementing development interventions., Demonstrate effective evidence-based writing for both development professionals and for public/non-specialist audiences., Facilitate participatory learning activities (PLA) in the context of development program planning and reporting., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG, WRT-AG)

class: GDEV 2410
class title: The Art of Teaching
description: This exploratory course is designed for students of all backgrounds and interests who have a desire to learn more about education and teaching. Teaching takes place in a variety of contexts from the family to the workplace, and this course endeavors to examine the elements of teaching that transcend the typical school-teaching environment. Designed to guide students in reflecting upon their experiences to help them better understand the decisions they make as teachers. Students have the opportunity to pursue their own interests through a teaching fieldwork assignment. Possible field experiences range from large group to tutorial situations, from preschool to adult education, from traditional school subject matters to recreational and occupational areas, and from school-based to nonformal situations. The course work and readings are designed to build on these experiences throughout the semester and provide concepts and skills to apply in the field.
outcome: Analyze teaching situations using appropriate conceptual frameworks., Articulate and critically examine their beliefs and assumptions about teaching and schooling., Reflect on the elements involved in being an effective teacher in formal and informal educational situations., Discuss current educational issues as they relate to formal and informal educational settings., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: GDEV 2941
class title: Reflection on Agriculture Engaged Experiences
description: The Lund Fellows Program and Community Food Systems minor both offer students the opportunity for an engaged learning experience in agriculture and food systems. This course is designed to help students critically reflect on their engaged experiences with non-Cornell partner organizations. This seven-week course will maximize student engaged learning and reflection by utilizing the following learning topics: (1) critical reflection; (2) in-person discussions (3) peer-review; (4) gratitude; (5)public presentations The course aims to build a sense of community through peer learning and reflection among students who shared similar summer experiences.
outcome: Develop an advanced understanding of agriculture and food systems and the complexities of working in the field., Summarize an understanding of the host organization and community., Articulate progress towards personal and professional goals., Demonstrate gratitude to donors and mentors., Design and discuss professional outputs or products to diverse audiences., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GDEV 2940.

class: GDEV 3010
class title: Theories of Society and Development
description: This course explores the development of social theory from the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century to contemporary debates about the status and limits of sociological knowledge. It introduces the key texts of the most influential forerunners of modern sociological thought - Marx, Weber, Durkheim and Simmel - in the context of the social and political transformations of their time. The course is organized into two parts. The first part explores the contrasting accounts of modernity developed by these classical social theorists, placing particular emphasis on aspects of their thought concerned with the nature and direction of society as a whole. The second part examines contemporary critical engagements with the classical heritage from a variety of vantage points: globalization, postmodernism, feminism, race and cultural difference, and notions of multiple or alternative modernities.
outcome: Evaluate competing theoretical frameworks within sociology using reflective skills., Explore complex issues in the relationship of theory and history and develop analytic skills., Use writing skills developed through composing weekly outlines that require synthesis of key ideas in the assigned readings., Use oral skills developed through class presentations and discussions., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: development sociology or sociology course.

class: GDEV 3030
class title: FoodCycle: Systems Thinking Toward Circular Economy for Organic Resources
description: In seeking to understand issues and opportunities at the nexus of agriculture, sanitation, water, health and the natural and built environments, students will gain skills in systems thinking, participatory design and innovation towards systems change. Through individual and collective work, students will conduct general and specific systems analysis and construct systems models to identify opportunities to reduce carbon pollution, improve system health. Students will seek to learn from cases and literature from diverse national and international contexts. The Cornell campus will be considered a "living laboratory" for an inquiry into how organic resources flow through our facilities, and how waste flows might be utilized to produce energy, fertilizer, food, building materials and/or other valued products. Students will engage with local entities (facilities, organizations, farms and other enterprises) to gain specific information that will inform our analysis. Students will engage in hands-on work to learn about ways in which organic resources can be up-cycled.
outcome: Describe concepts and skills related to systems thinking, analysis and intervention, including ability to understand and design pathways to change in diverse contexts., Explain systems related to organic resource management, such as those involved in food, agriculture, sanitation, the built environment, and health-related surveillance., Analyze and conceptualize context-related similarities and differences that influence problems, opportunities and pathways to change., Design a waste-to-value chain (e.g., porta-potties/toilets ; loo-litter from corn cobs [similar in purpose and format to kitty litter]; making building materials from agricultural wastes)., Create up-cycling activities, including design, invention, production and utilization., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3091
class title: Global Health Case Studies from Weill Cornell Medicine
description: Weill Cornell Medicine faculty from several clinical departments including the department of medicine, department of surgery, department of anesthesiology, department of pediatrics, department of psychiatry, department of radiation oncology, department of public health, and department of emergency medicine, share their experiences in global health and international work. These global health experts will present their experiences abroad in a seminar style course.
outcome: Students will be able to: Describe discrete, short-term interventions in global health including medical mission style surgery and anesthesia services and emergency responses to humanitarian and natural disasters, such as the COVID-19, Ebola, or Zika outbreaks, the Haitian Earthquake, and the Syrian Refugee Crisis., Students will be able to: Describe the sustainable nature of existing global health initiatives such as Physicians for Human Rights work, cervical cancer screening, and long-term research collaborations in low- and middle-income countries through an understanding of the biosocial factors that impact health like poverty and economics, gender violence, and access to natural resources., Students will be able to: Compare and contrast the differences between traditional medical mission style work abroad and a biosocial approach to global health., 

class: GDEV 3100
class title: Foundations in Leadership: Skills for Personal and Professional Effectiveness
description: This course frames leadership as a particular way of approaching life, one that is essential to both personal fulfillment and career effectiveness. The course begins with the inner work of a leader's personal development and then explores how leaders work through others to enhance their influence.
outcome: Develop a critical understanding of contemporary leadership theories, styles, approaches and roles., Examine and clarify personal inspirations, values, and purposes in careers and life., Learn to align those inner motivations with personal actions, decisions, and communications in order to become more authentic, effective, and influential., Build skills for communicating effectively, especially in difficult conversations such as delivering feedback, resolving conflict, and influencing others., Practice skills for building effective teams and leading group planning, decision making and problem solving processes., Create a personal learning plan and leadership portfolio for supporting personal development., Establish a habit of reflection to promote continuous learning and effective leadership., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3105
class title: Post-Internship: Reflection on Engaged Experiences
description: The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) offers students opportunities for experiential and engaged learning through internships with organizations in communities and organizations locally, domestically, and internationally. While personal and professional growth happens during the internship itself, engaged learning theory suggests that intentional, scaffolded opportunities for reflection on those experiences is what enables transformative student learning and invites students to make connections between their individual actions and larger systems of global change. To that end, in this course students focus on their internship experience to intentionally discern what they have learned and develop a plan for building on that learning going forward. Students will summarize key course takeaways in a poster to be presented during the annual CALS Engaged and Experiential Learning Symposium.
outcome: Articulate the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that they've developed or refined as a result of their internship., Formulate a plan for building on their experience to further their personal and professional development during the remainder of their time at Cornell, as well as in other academic or non-academic contexts., Critically review and share constructive feedback on a peer's work, as well as evaluate the value of feedback received from peers relative to guiding their own revisions., Create an informative and visually appealing poster which effectively communicates engaged learning or research outcomes and related implications., Design and deliver an elevator speech in which they effectively and succinctly convey key points they want their target audience to understand about their poster topic., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: IARD &amp; GDEV majors: GDEV 2105 and pre-departure portfolio, or GDEV 3104; CALS Global Fellows: ALS 2300.

class: GDEV 3140
class title: Mapping Our Worlds: Cartography and Analysis in GIS
description: How things are related in space matters for many things—where different groups live and work, who faces health hazards, how people experience the places they live in, and more. Maps are powerful tools because they help us recognize things we might not otherwise see—and because they present pictures of the world that people act upon to pursue goals. In this class we learn how to conduct spatial analyses and make maps, shouldering the responsibility entailed by the power maps can confer. In-class lectures and activities will provide conceptual and technical foundations for spatial analysis and cartography. Lab sessions and assignments will give a practical introduction to using GIS software to map and analyze spatial patterns.
outcome: Explain conceptual issues and choices involved in making maps and understanding phenomena that take place across space., Use GIS software to implement data management and spatial analysis operations., Use GIS software to create informative maps and justify your choices in displaying information on those maps., Gather data, conduct an analysis, and present findings regarding a spatial phenomenon., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3150
class title: Climate Change and Global Development: Living in the Anthropocene
description: This course investigates social, political, and economic life in the age of the "Anthropocene": the current geological era in which humans have irrevocably altered the earth's biophysical systems. We analyze what political-economic dynamics have led to this, how climate change is known and predicted scientifically, and the impacts it has on politics, economies, environments, and societies across scales. Drawing on case studies from around the world, we investigate topics including climate change impacts on land, oceans, animals, and forests; climate migrants and political instability; (un)natural disasters such as fires, floods, and hurricanes; and sea level rise and cities. We also investigate existing and potential political and economic responses to climate change ranging from international governance agreements and green markets to local climate justice movements.
outcome: Critically analyze the uneven consequences of climate change on politics, environments, economies, and societies around the world., Connect localized impacts of climate change in particular places to global ecological and political-economic processes., Trace the causes of anthropogenic climate change and how knowledge about climate change has developed., Write and speak convincingly on sociological, geographical, and critical development concepts and how they relate to contemporary climate change., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: GDEV 3280
class title: Fundamentals of Population Health
description: Population health focuses on the health and well‐being of entire populations. Populations may be geographically defined, such as neighborhoods or counties; may be based on groups of individuals who share common characteristics such as age, race‐ethnicity, disease status, or socioeconomic status; or may be specific patient groups "attributed" to accountable healthcare organizations using a variety of methods. With roots in epidemiology, public health, and demography, key tools of population health include health measurement, risk stratification, chronic care management, identifying "upstream" social determinants of health, cross-sector collaboration to improve prevention and wellness, and increasing health equity. Given the shifting health care environment – from fee‐for‐service to value‐based care – students who are able to apply tools to measure analyze, evaluate, and improve the health of populations (and achieve the Triple Aim) will be well‐positioned for jobs in health care, health policy, public health, and medicine (among others) as the field continues to evolve.
outcome: Apply a population health and health equity perspective to problem solving., Calculate and use for decision‐making, key population health metrics and methods., Leverage publicly available social, place, demographic, and health data to analyze the health of a local community., Synthesize existing tools to design a population-tailored social determinants of health (SDH) screening tool., Analyze claims data to identify "high cost" patients and build tailored care teams to support patient needs., Build an Excel tool to identify patients at high risk for readmission following surgery and develop a tailored care transition plan designed to reduce readmissions., Recommend population health management practices (i.e., risk stratification, care coordination, complex care management, patient engagement, cross‐sector collaboration), population health delivery models (e.g., medical homes, telehealth), and payment models (e.g., capitation; Medicaid waivers), to achieve the Triple Aim., Consider different perspectives and demonstrate multicultural competence and inclusive communication while working in diverse groups or sharing in Discussion posts., Explain how structural racism contributes to observed health disparities and apply a health equity framework to class projects and discussions., Demonstrate flexibility, adaptability, and a growth mindset as we navigate a potentially shifting class environment., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: at least one of the following: GDEV 2200, HD 1170, HD 2180, PUBPOL 2030, PUBPOL 2100, PUBPOL 2208, PUBPOL 2300, PUBPOL 2350, PSYCH 1101, SOC 1101. 

class: GDEV 3290
class title: Comparative Politics of Latin America
description: This course is designed as an introduction to political, economic, and social issues in 20th century Latin America. Topics are organized chronologically, beginning with the crisis of agro-export economies and oligarchic rule in the 1930s, the onset of state-led development and mass politics in the 1930s and 40s, the military takeovers and revolutionary struggles of the 1960s and 70s, patterns of democratization and market liberalization in the 1980s and 90s, and the recent experience with populist and leftist governments in much of the region. Among the main issues covered are populism and corporatism, dependency theory and import-substitution industrialization, different patterns of authoritarian rule, social movements and revolution, democratic breakdowns and transitions, the debt crisis and market reforms, and U.S.-Latin American relations. Throughout the semester, we will draw on examples from the entire region, but focus on paradigmatic national cases. Knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese is not required.
 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3311
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Environmental governance is defined as the assemblage of institutions that regulate society-nature interactions and shape environmental outcomes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. Institutions, broadly defined, are mechanisms of social coordination including laws (formal) and social norms (informal) that guide the behavior of individuals. Participants in the course will explore the roles of governments, markets, and collective action in environmental management and mismanagement. We will emphasize interactions among leading environmental policy strategies: public regulation, market-based incentives, and community-based resource management. The course is focused around a set of analytic perspectives. These theoretical frameworks allow us to synthesize empirical observations and material changes in ways that inform our understanding of contemporary evolution of environmental policy and management.
outcome: Students will gain familiarity with the concepts, theories, and applications of institutional analysis applied to environment., Students will develop critical awareness of the strengths and weakness of states, markets, and collective structures as resources for social regulation., Students will develop an historical appreciation of environmental policy in order to reflect critically on contemporary status and trends., Students will develop an interdisciplinary understanding of environmental policy through exploration of economic, sociological, and political scientific perspectives., Students will be exposed to a broad range of environmental problems and policy and management responses. Coverage includes national and international cases, and analyses at multiple scales., Students will develop capacity to conduct institutional analysis including the specification of a research question, policy research, synthesis, and communication., Students will build generic competencies including reading of scientific and popular texts, writing, oral communication, group work, and critical analysis., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3350
class title: Youth Organizations and Leadership Development
description: Participants learn how to facilitate both youth and adult volunteer leadership development. They examine factors affecting membership, purposes, design, operation, and administration of youth organizations.
outcome: Demonstrate application of experiential learning models in education., Explain how youth organizations relate to secondary education and career exploration., Demonstrate knowledge and skills necessary for managing a 4-H/FFA chapter., Explain how the 4-H/FFA functions on the local, state, and national levels., Apply youth leadership theory to development of targeted youth organizations., Engage in the issues surrounding youth development in education & society., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 3500
class title: Development in Action: Fall Faculty-Led Study Trip Preparation
description: This 7-week fall course prepares students for a faculty-led winter study trip within the Global Development department. Students will spend class sessions gaining familiarity with a particular global development challenge (i.e., hunger &amp; sustainable food production, inequality across the life course, environmental challenges &amp; solutions, etc.) through readings, lectures, and in-class discussions. Upon completion of the fall course, students then enroll in 2.5 practicum hours of winter session credits, where they travel to meet with actors on the ground who are navigating and developing solutions to these challenges.
outcome: Describe the state of a set of development challenges in a specified context., Map the range of actors and institutions working to address this challenge., 

class: GDEV 3680
class title: Environmental Decision Making
description: This course is an introduction to the science underlying decision making with an emphasis on environmental decisions. The course will introduce the basics of judgment and decision-making theory and demonstrate how and why people often make 'bad' decisions. Students will learn how policy makers are able to influence people's environmental behavior. Working in teams, student will try to influence environmental behavior around campus or town, developing an experiment and executing it. In the process students will learn how to write up an academic study that provides rationale, theoretical justification, and presents the results of their experiment.
outcome: Use the lens of behavioral science to understand environmental problems and the implications for sustainability., Articulate the core drivers of environmental decision-making and barriers to pro-environmental behavior., Develop a behavioral experiment to test interventions for increasing sustainable behavior in coordination with a community partner., Assess the behavioral outcomes of various environmental policy interventions., Write a clear academic manuscript contextualizing and analyzing the results of an experimental study., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 4011
class title: Special Methods of Instruction in Agricultural Science Education
description: Students complete learning and skills development about special methods for teaching agricultural science education. Such learning and skill development may include metal fabrication, small engine physics, and/or special laboratory instruction related to agricultural sciences. Students reflect upon that learning and skill development and then create units of instruction employing special methods used to teach secondary and/or post-secondary students about agricultural knowledge, skills, and processes.
outcome: Develop proficiency and knowledge of technical aspects of teaching agriculture to include metal or wood fabrication, small engine maintenance and repair or hydraulics and electricity., Demonstrate safe and effective teaching strategies to deliver content in outcome #1 to the selected audience base., 

class: GDEV 4051
class title: Exploring Strategies for Teaching and Learning
description: EDUC 4050 builds off of the broad nature of EDUC 2410. This course incorporates extensive field work in teaching, lesson planning, and evaluation based upon current theories in instruction at the collegiate level. The course is intended to integrate theory and practice associated with learning and teaching in college classroom settings and includes a minimum of 40 hours of supervised fieldwork in specific college classes.
outcome: Becoming a professional teacher who is developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of reflective practice, collaborative action, and lifelong inquiry into teaching and learning., Developing a personal philosophy of and a vision for delivering technical content through education pedagogy., Develop understanding of how to integrate subject specific knowledge and pedagogy, nature of the discipline, and nature of learning in the college classroom., Designing learning environments that promote engaged learning., Developing skills in communication, management, and a variety of instructional and assessment strategies that contribute to meaningful instruction college classes., Becoming competent in selecting and integrating appropriate technological tools into instruction., 

class: GDEV 4080
class title: Demographic Techniques
description: This course explores social change through demographic methods, addressing how public policies aim to impact societal outcomes—such as reducing crime rates, lowering poverty levels, or increasing voter turnout—rather than focusing on individual behavior. While quantitative social science often emphasizes understanding individual actions, this course provides methods that bridge the gap between individual patterns and broader societal trends. Building on foundational techniques from introductory social statistics courses—such as univariate, bivariate, and multivariate regression—the course covers life tables, Lexis diagrams, and decomposition methods. These demographic methods focus on population-level dynamics and the changing composition of national populations, making the course essential for social scientists and policy analysts interested in examining the trends, causes, and consequences of aggregate social change.
outcome: Demonstrate how to build a life table using various methods and understand the connections between life tables and survival analysis., Think creatively about how to use these methods and existing data to make a novel research contribution., Write clearly about what the results from life tables can tell us about demographic processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2030.

class: GDEV 4120
class title: Urban Public Management
description: Local governments across the world face challenges of infrastructure and service delivery in the context of fiscal constraints. Innovations often involve devolution and privatization. Scholarly research debates whether these market approaches promote efficiency, regional equity, local economic growth and citizen voice. Students will review the theoretical bases for these claims and the empirical evidence from around the world. Students will write theory papers as well as engage in group work on practical policy questions facing cities.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: GDEV 4190
class title: Quantitative Research Methods
description: In this course, students will harness statistical analysis to tackle real-world questions. It is designed for undergrads and grads with introductory statistical knowledge. The curriculum covers techniques such as correlation, ANOVA, and regression but emphasizes the derivation of meaning for applied audiences using cross-sectional, nested, and time-series data. The hands-on experience extends to data cleaning, analysis of missing data, variable transformation, and other data management tasks facilitated by statistical software. Initially, students work on provided data. Later, they collaborate in teams finding data to complete a significant project suitable for publication. This practical approach equips students with the skills to analyze and interpret complex data, contributing to informed decision-making in social sciences.
outcome: Describe how and why statistics are used in social policy research. • Illustrate the relationships between research questions, theory, data, and methods — including: Select and carry out methods based on research questions, theory and available data. Evaluate and describe the strengths and weaknesses of chosen methods., Find multiple sources of data and manage selected data including data cleaning, manipulation, and merging multiple datasets, Employ a full range of statistical techniques including: Univariate and descriptive statistics including distribution, spread, and skewness Bivariate analysis including t-tests, scatterplots, crosstabs, and correlations Multivariate analysis including ANOVA, OLS regression, and logistic regression with exposure to introductory spatial analyses, data visualization, time series regression, and multilevel regression. • Employ issues of reliability, precision, and competently discuss difference between causation and correlation., 
distribution categories: (MQR-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics course or permission of instructor.

class: GDEV 4450
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 4770
class title: Seminar on Issues in African Development
description: Examines a broad range of critical concerns in contemporary Africa including food production, human resource development, migration, urbanization, environmental resource management, economic growth, and policy guidance. The weekly presentations are made by invited specialists. Students write weekly memos about the talks.
outcome: To learn about African development, people, cultures and societies and explore development theories with their alternative viewpoints related to a specific theme., To explore alternative viewpoints and exchange ideas on different African development-related topics., To strengthen written and oral skills in synthesis of and reflection on readings, seminars and discussions., 

class: GDEV 4961
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: GDEV 4970
class title: Independent Study in Global Development
description: Informal study may include a reading course, research experience, or public service experience.

class: GDEV 4980
class title: Teaching Experience in Global Development
description: Designed to give an undergraduate student practical teaching experience and deepened subject matter knowledge through working with a Development Sociology faculty member in planning and teaching a course. An enrolled student will regularly discuss teaching topics with the supervising faculty member; topics such as course objectives, subject matter, teaching techniques, and assessment strategies. The specific responsibilities will be negotiated between the faculty member and student, but, as appropriate for the particular course, may include researching course-related topics, preparing course materials, leading discussions, commenting on assignments, writing exam questions, assisting with grading, gathering student feedback, and tutoring.
outcome: Students will gain practical teaching experience., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in the course to be taught, or other appropriate previous training and experience.

class: GDEV 4990
class title: Independent Research in Global Development
description: Permits outstanding students to conduct laboratory or field research in global development under appropriate faculty supervision. The research should be scientific: systematic, controlled, empirical. Research goals should include description, prediction, explanation, or policy orientation and should generate new knowledge.

class: GDEV 5030
class title: FoodCycle: Systems Thinking Toward Circular Economy for Organic Resources
description: In seeking to understand issues and opportunities at the nexus of agriculture, sanitation, water, health and the natural and built environments, students will gain skills in systems thinking, participatory design and innovation towards systems change. Through individual and collective work, students will conduct general and specific systems analysis and construct systems models to identify opportunities to reduce carbon pollution, improve system health. Students will seek to learn from cases and literature from diverse national and international contexts. The Cornell campus will be considered a "living laboratory" for an inquiry into how organic resources flow through our facilities, and how waste flows might be utilized to produce energy, fertilizer, food, building materials and/or other valued products. Students will engage with local entities (facilities, organizations, farms and other enterprises) to gain specific information that will inform our analysis. Students will engage in hands-on work to learn about ways in which organic resources can be up-cycled.
outcome: Describe concepts and skills related to systems thinking, analysis and intervention, including ability to understand and design pathways to change in diverse contexts., Explain systems related to organic resource management, such as those involved in food, agriculture, sanitation, the built environment, and health-related surveillance., Analyze and conceptualize context-related similarities and differences that influence problems, opportunities and pathways to change., Design a waste-to-value chain (e.g., porta-potties/toilets ; loo-litter from corn cobs [similar in purpose and format to kitty litter]; making building materials from agricultural wastes)., Create up-cycling activities, including design, invention, production and utilization., 

class: GDEV 5140
class title: Mapping Our Worlds with GIS: Cartography and Analysis in GIS
description: How things are related in space matters for many things—where different groups live and work, who faces health hazards, how people experience the places they live in, and more. Maps are powerful tools because they help us recognize things we might not otherwise see—and because they present pictures of the world that people act upon to pursue goals. In this class we learn how to conduct spatial analyses and make maps, shouldering the responsibility entailed by the power maps can confer. In-class lectures and activities will provide conceptual and technical foundations for spatial analysis and cartography. Lab sessions and assignments will give a practical introduction to using GIS software to map and analyze spatial patterns.
outcome: Explain conceptual issues and choices involved in making maps and understanding phenomena that take place across space., Use GIS software to implement data management and spatial analysis operations., Use GIS software to create informative maps and justify your choices in displaying information on those maps., Gather data, conduct an analysis, and present findings regarding a spatial phenomenon., Discuss and apply key concepts in social scientific work on mapping and spatial analysis., Frame research questions on phenomena with spatial dimensions, conduct analyses, and report findings in ways that reflect advanced reasoning and build on conversations within their discipline., 

class: GDEV 5350
class title: Youth Organizations and Leadership Development
description: Participants learn how to facilitate both youth and adult volunteer leadership development. They examine factors affecting membership, purposes, design, operation, and administration of youth organizations.
outcome: Demonstrate application of experiential learning models in education., Explain how youth organizations relate to secondary education and career exploration., Demonstrate knowledge and skills necessary for managing a 4-H/FFA chapter., Explain how the 4-H/FFA functions on the local, state, and national levels., Apply youth leadership theory to development of targeted youth organizations., Engage in the issues surrounding youth development in education & society., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: GDEV 5500
class title: Development in Action: Fall Faculty-Led Study Trip Preparation
description: This 7-week fall course prepares students for a faculty-led winter study trip within the Global Development department. Students will spend class sessions gaining familiarity with a particular global development challenge (i.e., hunger &amp; sustainable food production, inequality across the life course, environmental challenges &amp; solutions, etc.) through readings, lectures, and in-class discussions. Upon completion of the fall course, students then enroll in 2.5 practicum hours of winter session credits, where they travel to meet with actors on the ground who are navigating and developing solutions to these challenges.
outcome: Describe the state of a set of development challenges in a specified context., Map the range of actors and institutions working to address this challenge., 

class: GDEV 5680
class title: Environmental Decision Making
description: The objective of this course is to provide an interdisciplinary introduction to the science underlying decision making with an emphasis on environmental decisions. The course will introduce the basics of information processing and demonstrate how and why we as humans often make 'bad' decisions. They will study how policy makers are able to intervene and influence people's behavior. Throughout the course students will work in groups to try to influence an environmental behavior around campus or town- developing an experiment and executing it. In the process students will learn how to write up an academic study that provides rational, justification, and analysis of the results of your experiment.
outcome: Use the lens of behavioral science to understand environmental problems and the implications for sustainability., Articulate the core drivers of environmental decision-making and barriers to pro-environmental behavior., Develop a behavioral experiment to test interventions for increasing sustainable behavior in coordination with a community partner., Assess the behavioral outcomes of various environmental policy interventions., Write a clear academic manuscript contextualizing and analyzing the results of an experimental study., Apply decision science to their own academic research., Develop and write an effective research proposal for their own empirical study., 

class: GDEV 5970
class title: Independent Study in Global Development (MPS Students)
description: Allows M.P.S. students the opportunity to investigate special interests that are not treated in regularly scheduled courses. The student develops a plan of study to pursue under the direction of a faculty member.

class: GDEV 6080
class title: Demographic Techniques
description: This is the second course in the demographic techniques sequence. It has two foci. First, we will learn the basics of constructing single and multiple decrement life tables, along with extensions to cause-deleted life tables. Second, we will learn the basics of survival analysis, as well as how survival analysis relates to life tables. Although the primary goal is learning to use these techniques, this class also has a heavy emphasis on thinking about how to use these methods to produce something new and important for research. The grad students will also be asked to complete a 10 page research proposal.
outcome: Demonstrate how to build a life table using various methods and understand the connections between life tables and survival analysis., Think creatively about how to use these methods and existing data to make a novel research contribution., Write clearly about what the results from life tables can tell us about demographic processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics.

class: GDEV 6120
class title: Urban Public Management
description: Local governments across the world face challenges of infrastructure and service delivery in the context of fiscal constraints. Innovations often involve devolution and privatization. Scholarly research debates whether these market approaches promote efficiency, regional equity, local economic growth and citizen voice. Students will review the theoretical bases for these claims and the empirical evidence from around the world. Students will write theory papers as well as engage in group work on practical policy questions facing cities.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or equivalent.

class: GDEV 6190
class title: Quantitative Research Methods
description: In this course, students will harness statistical analysis to tackle real-world questions. It is designed for undergrads and grads with introductory statistical knowledge. The curriculum covers techniques such as correlation, ANOVA, and regression but emphasizes the derivation of meaning for applied audiences using cross-sectional, nested, and time-series data. The hands-on experience extends to data cleaning, analysis of missing data, variable transformation, and other data management tasks facilitated by statistical software. Initially, students work on provided data. Later, they collaborate in teams finding data to complete a significant project suitable for publication. This practical approach equips students with the skills to analyze and interpret complex data, contributing to informed decision-making in social sciences.
outcome: Describe how and why statistics are used in social policy research. • Illustrate the relationships between research questions, theory, data, and methods — including: Select and carry out methods based on research questions, theory and available data. Evaluate and describe the strengths and weaknesses of chosen methods., Find multiple sources of data and manage selected data including data cleaning, manipulation, and merging multiple datasets., Employ a full range of statistical techniques including: Univariate and descriptive statistics including distribution, spread, and skewness Bivariate analysis including t-tests, scatterplots, crosstabs, and correlations Multivariate analysis including ANOVA, OLS regression, and logistic regression with exposure to introductory spatial analyses, data visualization, time series regression, and multilevel regression. • Employ issues of reliability, precision, and competently discuss difference between causation and correlation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics course or permission of instructor.

class: GDEV 6320
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Considers the question of environmental governance, defined as the assemblage of social institutions that regulate natural resource use and shape environmental outcomes. Participants explore the roles of public policy, market exchange, and collective action in resource (mis)management. Introduces theoretical concepts from a variety of social science perspectives to support case studies and student-led discussions. Comparative analysis of how governance is pursued in different countries, historical periods, and ecological contexts (forestry, endangered species, water quality) highlight scope for institutional innovation. Students taking the course for graduate credit are required to read supplemental materials, undertake more complex research assignments, and participate in seminar discussion section.
outcome: Describe the history and processes of environmental governance., Apply terms, concepts, and methods of critical institutional analysis to environmental governance., Take positions on classical and contemporary debates animating environmental policy processes., Apply knowledge to a specific question, concept, or problem selected for the term paper., Demonstrate content-specific oral and communication skills., 

class: GDEV 6455
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include: economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food and nutrition policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., Graduate students will be required to lead/mentor their case study group of undergraduate students and be provided with an opportunity to identify an area of future graduate research for his/her own thesis., 

class: GDEV 6770
class title: Seminar on Issues in African Development
description: Examines a broad range of critical concerns in contemporary Africa including food production, human resource development, migration, urbanization, environmental resource management, economic growth, and policy guidance. The weekly presentations are made by invited specialists. Students write weekly memos about the talks. Graduate students (CRP 6770/GDEV 6770) facilitate one seminar question period.
outcome: To learn about African development, people, cultures and societies and explore development theories with their alternative viewpoints related to a specific theme., To explore alternative viewpoints and exchange ideas on different African development-related topics., To strengthen written and oral skills in synthesis of and reflection on readings, seminars and discussions., 

class: GDEV 6820
class title: Community Organizing and Development
description: This course is designed to provoke students from a wide variety of gradate fields to question and examine the cultural and political dimensions of development practice in everyday community settings and contexts. It's specifically focused on the history, theory and practice of community organizing, and the roles NGO, government, academic, and other professionals do, can, and should play in the public work of democracy.
outcome: Discuss the history, theory, and practice of community organizing., Discuss the roles that NGO, government, academic, and other professionals should play in the public work of democracy., 

class: GDEV 6960
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: GDEV 6970
class title: Global Development MPS Seminar
description: A seminar for M.P.S. - Global Development students to discuss important issues in their field and to prepare themselves to write M.P.S. project papers. Specific content varies.

class: GDEV 6980
class title: Teaching Experiences for MPS in Global Development
description: This course enables MPS students to get valuable teaching experience in any one of the GDEV courses for credit.
outcome: Student will obtain valuable teaching experience in the course chosen., 

class: GDEV 7900
class title: Graduate-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. students only before "A" exam has been passed.

class: GDEV 7910
class title: Teaching Experience
description: Participation in the ongoing teaching program of the department.

class: GDEV 7970
class title: Development Studies Professional Development Seminar
description: This course will serve as a collaborative space where PhD students can learn and share about issues of course-taking selection, grant sources and writing strategies, preparation of CVs and cover letters, meet and interact with Field Faculty, engage in practice conference- and job-talks, and other useful professionalization practices for new and more experienced PhD students. Guest speakers will be engaged and current students and alumni will share useful and strategic practices.
outcome: Students will be able to describe the research interests of their peers and GDEV faculty members., Students will practice conference and job-talks and provide feedback to fellow students., Students will design and develop their CV and learn various strategies that lead to a strong cover letter., Students will develop skills related to employment-seeking activities., Students will describe the range of academic and non-academic jobs that program Alumni are engaged in., Students will apply other relevant professional development topics and strategies., 

class: GDEV 8720
class title: Graduate Level Ind Study in Development Studies
description: Limited to master's and doctoral degree candidates with permission of the graduate field member concerned.
outcome: Summarize and explain major theories and theoretical debates in the disciplines relevant to the student's research question., Develop original research questions grounded in a review of the existing literature. Design and complete data collection and analysis for an original piece of research., Demonstrate competence with the appropriate research methods and research design, depending on the research question., Develop professional writing and communicating skills., 

class: GDEV 8900
class title: Master's Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for master's students.

class: GDEV 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. candidates after "A" exam has been passed.

class: GERST 1121
class title: FWS: Writing Berlin
description: Berlin is a city that reinvents itself by rewriting itself. In this writing seminar, we'll study a variety of literary, visual, and sonic texts to create a mythical map of the city from its emergence as modern metropolis in the 1920s, reduction to rubble in World War II, refuge for the disaffected in the 1980s, and rebirth in the 21st century. As we make our way through the linguistic, visual, and aural landscape of its ever-changing topography, we'll create our own stories of a mythical Berlin in dialogue with texts written by the displaced persons who breached its walls and navigated its illicit economies. We'll also become more critical readers and viewers, as well as better writers.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: GERST 1122
class title: FWS: Love and Death in Vienna
description: Singing boys. Dancing horses. Waltzing debutantes. Those fortunate enough to live in a city where each day begins with a pastry and ends with a two-liter bottle of wine must live a charmed existence! Not according to Freud. After decades of treating the morbid Viennese, he concluded that human nature must be torn between two warring forces: a love instinct and a death drive. In this FWS we'll explore both sides of Vienna's enigmatic character, its life-affirming hedonism and its self-destructive nihilism, through the lens of narrative fiction on page and on screen. Along the way, we'll learn to read and view more critically by writing our way through the best literature and cinema of the multi-ethnic metropolis on the Danube.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: GERST 1170
class title: FWS: Marx, Nietzsche, Freud
description: A basic understanding of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud is a prerequisite for participating in critical debates in the humanities and social sciences. Our seminar will explore key terms in the revolutionary models of critical analysis these thinkers pioneered: historical materialism, post-metaphysical philosophy, and psychoanalysis.  This will mean articulating points of contrast as well as convergence.  Discussions and writing exercises will focus on texts that created the discursive framework for critiquing society and culture today.  Our method will proceed from the premise that critical reading, thinking, and writing are inseparable moments in the same operation of critique.  The question that guides that method will be: Do alternative ways of thinking exist in opposition to the ones we view as natural, inevitable, or universal?
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: GERST 1210
class title: Exploring German Contexts I
description: Students develop basic abilities in listening, reading, writing, and speaking German in meaningful contexts through interaction in small group activities. Course materials including videos, short articles, and songs provide students with varied perspectives on German language, culture, and society.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: GERST 1220
class title: Exploring German Contexts II
description: Students build on their basic knowledge of German by engaging in intense and more sustained interaction in the language. Students learn more advanced language structures allowing them to express more complex ideas in German. Discussions, videos, and group activities address topics of relevance to the contemporary German-speaking world.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 1210 or based on German Placement test result.

class: GERST 1230
class title: Expanding the German Dossier
description: Students continue to develop their language skills by discussing a variety of cultural topics and themes in the German-speaking world. The focus of the course is on expanding vocabulary, reviewing major grammar topics, developing effective reading strategies, improving listening comprehension, and working on writing skills. Work in small groups increases each student's opportunity to speak in German and provides for greater feedback and individual help.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Limited to students who have previously studied German and based on German Placement test result. 

class: GERST 2000
class title: Germany: Intercultural Context
description: Students examine important aspects of present-day German culture while expanding and strengthening their reading, writing, and speaking skills in German. Materials for each topic are selected from a variety of sources (fiction, newspapers, magazines, and the Internet). Units address a variety of topics including studying at a German university, modern literature, Germany online, and Germany at the turn of the century. Oral and written work and individual and group presentations emphasize accurate and idiomatic expression in German. Successful completion of the course enables students to continue with more advanced courses in language, literature, and culture.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 1220  + placement result or GERST 1230.

class: GERST 2005
class title: Intermediate Yiddish
description: Intended for intermediate students, this is the third in a three-course sequence, designed to enable students to meet the College of Arts &amp; Sciences language requirement. Students will increase their understanding of the language in cultural context and will further develop their capacity to produce both spoken and written Yiddish.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 1777 or permission of instructor.

class: GERST 2040
class title: Perspectives on German Culture
description: This course aims at sharpening your awareness of personal and cultural subjectivity by examining texts in a variety of media against the backdrop of cultural, political, and historical contexts.  We will focus on improving your oral and written expression of idiomatic German by giving attention to more sophisticated aspects of using enriched vocabulary in a variety of conversational contexts and written genres. Materials will include readings in contemporary prose, newscasts, research at the Johnson Art Museum, and interviews with native speakers on a topic of contemporary cultural relevance.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 2000 or placement by examination (placement score and CASE).

class: GERST 2567
class title: Holocaust in History and Memory
description: This course explores the history of the Holocaust during which the Nazis murdered six million Jews. Topics covered in this class include the history of antisemitism in Europe and twentieth-century Germany, the origins and rule of the Nazis, the politics of World War II, the Final Solution and extermination camps, Jewish literary responses to the Holocaust, among other topics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: GERST 2700
class title: Introduction to German Culture and Thought
description: Big names, Big ideas, and Big events are associated with German culture and thought: Luther, Faust, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, Mozart, Beethoven, Kant, Hegel, Goethe, Einstein, Kafka and Thomas Mann; Enlightenment; World Wars and Reunification; European Union, and Migration and Refugees: In this course, we shall cover the broad spectrum of both the long tradition of German culture and thought, and examine the wide range of political, literary, sociological, and artistic topics, themes, and questions that are of urgent contemporary concern for Germany, Europe, and beyond. Guest lecturers will introduce you to the wide and exciting field of German Studies. Topics include: the age of enlightenment; literatures of migration and minorities; avant-garde art; philosophy, aesthetics, and critical theory; Weimar and War; Holocaust and its Aftermath; film and media; genres of literature: novel, novella, short story, lyric poetry, anecdote, autobiography; literature and politics; literature and the environment; digital humanities and literatures/fictions of cyber space. In addition, this course will introduce you to the techniques of critical analysis and writing. Authors include among many others: Goethe, Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche, Adorno, Freud, Kafka, Kluge, Marx, Thomas Mann, Kracauer, Benjamin.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: GERST 3070
class title: Challenge of Literary Language
description: Why do literary texts insist on bending (and even breaking) the rules that govern everyday language? Could we improve our mastery of colloquial German by accepting literature's challenge and investigating how it manipulates language in unconventional ways?  We'll take an inductive approach to answering these questions by engaging in close and sustained textual analysis of poetry, prose, and plays that fascinate as well as frustrate.  The course is designed to help you transition to advanced study in German, so we will also learn the terminology of poetics, rhetoric, and genre as we practice creating the oral and written texts (Referate und Seminararbeiten) that form the core of any seminar in Germanistik.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 2040, GERST 2060 or equivalent. 

class: GERST 3555
class title: Comics as a Medium
description: What are comics? While it's easy to identify a cartoon, graphic novel, or comic book, it's hard to understand the wide world of comics. As a medium, comics are part of a global tradition of visual storytelling and sequential art, including premodern tapestries, early modern pamphlets, and modern children's books, political cartoons, and animated films. With a focus on the German-speaking world, we will examine a wide range of comics genres (e.g., fiction, history, autobiography, journalism, comix) and formats (e.g., books, strips, pamphlets, zines). Our discussions will address questions of taste, aesthetics, materiality, censorship, representation, and word-image relations. While we will primarily be reading and writing about comics and comics studies, students will also gain some exposure to making comics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: GERST 3561
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GERST 3612
class title: Remembering Socialism: Literature and Film After the End of History
description: More than thirty years after the end of the Soviet Union, we have the distance needed to view the twentieth-century state socialist project from a historical perspective–even as Cold War tropes are revived amid another major confrontation with Russia. In this course, we will analyze memoirs, oral histories, historical fiction, films, and TV shows that look back at this period. How do the makers of these works use genre as a political as well as artistic tool? What are the political implications of comedy, cosplay, or melodrama when applied to communism? How does the portrayal of this period change as state socialism recedes into the distance? Texts from Russia, Ukraine, Germany, the Balkans, the UK, and the United States.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: GERST 4100
class title: The Seminar
description: Topics vary by instructor.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: any German course at the 3200-3499-level or equivalent.

class: GERST 4382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: GERST 4510
class title: Independent Study
description: Undergraduate student and faculty advisor to determine course of study and credit hours.

class: GERST 4530
class title: Honors Research
description: The Reading Course is administered by the director of the honors thesis. It carries 4 hours credit, and may be counted towards the work required for the German Major. The reading concentrates on a pre-determined topic or area. Students meet with their honors advisor about every two weeks throughout the term. Substantial reading assignments are given, and occasional short essays are written.

class: GERST 4540
class title: Honors Thesis
description: The thesis is to be written on a subject related to the work done in GERST 4530.  A suggested length for the thesis is 50-60 pages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GERST 4530.

class: GERST 5070
class title: Teaching German as a Foreign Language: Principles and Practices
description: Designed to familiarize students with current thought and approaches in the field of applied linguistics and language pedagogy.  Introduces different models of foreign language approaches and discusses various practices for the foreign language classroom.  Special consideration is given to topics such as language acquisition progression, planning syllabi, creating tasks and projects, designing classroom tests, and evaluating students' performance.  Participants conduct an action research project.

class: GERST 6224
class title: Writing for the Public: Adapting Academic Work for a General Audience
description: This workshop-style course will address the question of how to draw on academic research and expertise to write for a non-specialist audience. We will discuss the benefits of public-facing writing; how to select a publication to pitch; how to pitch an article; and how to draft and revise an article once a pitch has been accepted. These skills will be developed through practice. Students will develop real pitch ideas to use as a basis for articles that will be drafted and revised over the course of the semester. We will discuss questions such as selecting appropriate venues, adapting to a new writing style, sourcing, citation practices, and communicating with editors.

class: GERST 6310
class title: Reading Academic German I
description: This course emphasizes the acquisition of reading skills in German, using a variety of prepared and authentic texts.  The follow-up course, GERST 6320 , Reading Academic German II, is offered in the spring.

class: GERST 6382
class title: Paul de Man
description: This course studies major works from the great 20th century literary theorist Paul de Man, one of the founders of deconstruction. We will read carefully works from across his career, including broader theoretical statements and texts more closely focused on literary and philosophical texts. "The Rhetoric of Temporality, "Semiology and Rhetoric," "The Resistance to Theory," "Autobiography as De-Facement," "Shelley Disfigured," "Aesthetic Formalization in Kleist," "Phenomenality and Materiality in Kant," and works on Rousseau, Hegel, and others. We will include poetry and relevant sections of philosophical and theoretical material as appropriate.

class: GERST 6445
class title: German Media Theories
description: This seminar examines German media theories from the Frankfurt School to the Kittler Network and beyond. We will discuss influential concepts associated with this work (e.g., the culture industry, the public sphere, discourse networks), along with related concepts in media and cultural studies (e.g., space and time, analog and digital, old and new media). Theoretical readings address questions about media aesthetics, intermediality, and media change; automation, mechanization, and standardization; and communication, command, and control. Engaging with scholarly debates about interdisciplinarity and theory transfer, we will also revisit and revise reductive stereotypes about media critique, technological determinism, and the "Germanness" of German media theories.

class: GERST 7530
class title: Independent Study
description: Graduate student and faculty advisor to determine course of study and credit hours.

class: GERST 7531
class title: Colloquium
description: The course consists of a bi-weekly workshop series focusing on a range of interdisciplinary topics and sponsored by the Institute for German Cultural Studies (IGCS). Speakers include prominent scholars in the field of German Studies (understood in a wide, interdisciplinary sense) and advanced graduate students, who discuss their work-in-progress based on pre-circulated papers. Besides attending the workshops, course participants meet with the instructor for two additional sessions devoted to pursuing the ties between the topics and disciplinary fields showcased by the speakers and the students' own work. The course is thus intended both as a survey of disciplinary approaches in German and Humanities Studies and as a framework that allows graduate students to hone professional skills (presenter and panel respondent, newsletter contributor, etc).

class: GOVT 1101
class title: FWS: Power and Politics
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is devoted to the study of political power and the interaction of citizens and governments and provides the opportunity to write extensively about these issues. Topics vary by term.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: GOVT 1111
class title: Introduction to American Government and Politics
description: A policy-centered approach to the study of government in the American experience.  Considers the American Founding and how it influenced the structure of government;  how national institutions operate in shaping law and public policy; who has a voice in American politics and why some are more influential than others; and how existing public policies themselves influence social, economic, and political power.  Students will gain an introductory knowledge of the founding principles and structure of American government, political institutions, political processes, political behavior, and public policy.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 1503
class title: Introduction to Africana Studies
description: At the inception of this department at Cornell University in 1969, the Africana Studies and Research Center became the birthplace of the field "Africana studies." Africana studies emphasizes comparative and interdisciplinary studies of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. In this course, we will look at the diverse contours of the discipline. We will explore contexts ranging from modernity and the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and plantation complex in the New World to processes of decolonization and globalization in the contemporary digital age. This course offers an introduction to the study of Africa, the U.S., the Caribbean and other diasporas. This course will examine, through a range of disciplines, among them literature, history, politics, philosophy, the themes - including race/racism, the Middle Passage, sexuality, colonialism, and culture - that have dominated Africana Studies since its inception in the late-1960s. We will explore these issues in an attempt to understand how black lives have been shaped in a historical sense; and, of course, the effects of these issues in the contemporary moment. This course seeks to introduce these themes, investigate through one or more of the disciplines relevant to the question, and provide a broad understanding of the themes so as to enable the kind of intellectual reflection critical to Africana Studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 1571
class title: American Defense Policy and Military History from the Two World Wars to the Global War on Terror
description: America is finishing up two wars, one in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. They have been the longest wars in American history and have ended amid much ambivalence about the US engagement in each place and the results. They are part of a series of wars that America has fought as a global power, with a global reach, sending its forces thousands of miles from home. That global reach is not new, and goes back all the way to 1898 and the Spanish-American War. This course will look at the American military experience from our first tentative steps onto the global stage in 1898, to the earth-spanning conflicts of World War I and II, to the nuclear tension of Cold War conflicts, and finish with the current Long War against terrorism, and the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: GOVT 1817
class title: Making Sense of World Politics
description: An introduction to the basic concepts and practice of international politics with an emphasis on learning critical thinking.  The course is divided into two parts. In the first half, we will learn about different explanations.  In the second half, we will apply these explanations to a set of international events.
 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 2011
class title: September 11 and the Politics of Memory
description: As a country, we are what we remember. But who decides what facts and stories about the past are important enough to memorialize? What does that decision tell us about power and truth? This class will discuss how the attacks of September 11 are remembered in the United States and the rest of the world.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 2225
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 2264
class title: Political Violence
description: This course explores the causes and consequences of modern day civil wars. The first part of the course looks at individual, group, and state level factors that might cause civil wars to break out. The second part of the course looks at the dynamics of civil wars including intensity and types of violence. The third part assesses the consequences of civil war and the last part assesses how civil wars end. 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 2432
class title: Moral Dilemmas in the Law
description: The course concerns the principles and philosophical arguments underlying conflicts and moral dilemmas of central and ongoing concern to society as they arise within legal contexts. We consider questions such as what justifies using state power to punish people for wrongdoing, what kinds of conduct are rightly criminalized, what justifies the Supreme Court's power to strike down Congressional legislation, what justifies the right to private property and its boundaries, what is the right to privacy and why it is important, what are human rights, and what is the morality and law of war. Throughout we will be reading legal cases and philosophical commentaries that engage with the deep issues that the cases pose.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: GOVT 2665
class title: American Political Thought
description: This course offers a survey of American political thought from the colonial period to the present. We will read Puritan sermons, revolutionary pamphlets, philosophical treatises, presidential orations, slave narratives, prison writings, and other classic texts, in order to understand the ideas and debates that have shaped American politics. Topics to be discussed will include the meaning of freedom, the relationship between natural rights and constitutional authority, the idea of popular sovereignty, theories of representation and state power, race and national identity, problems of inequality, and the place of religion in public life. Lectures will be organized around both historical context and close reading of primary texts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: GOVT 2747
class title: History of the Modern Middle East
description: This course examines major trends in the evolution of the Middle East in the modern era. Focusing on the 19th and 20th centuries and ending with the "Arab Spring," we will consider Middle East history with an emphasis on five themes: imperialism, nationalism, modernization, Islam, and revolution. Readings will be supplemented with translated primary sources, which will form the backbone of class discussions.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: GOVT 2806
class title: Roman Law
description: This course presents a cultural and historical perspective on ideas of agency, responsibility, and punishment through foundational texts of western law. We will primarily focus on three main areas of law: (1) slavery and (2) family (both governed by the Roman law of persons), and (3) civil wrongs (the law of delict or culpable harm). Through an examination of the legal sources (in translation) and the study of the reasoning of the Roman jurists, this course will examine the evolution of jurisprudence: the development of the laws concerning power over slaves and women, and changes in the laws concerning penalties for crimes. No specific prior knowledge needed.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: GOVT 2977
class title: History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
description: This course examines the history of the conflict between two peoples with claims to the same land (Palestine/Israel), from the rise of their national movements at the turn of the 20th century and their eventual clash down to the present crisis. We will investigate the various stable and shifting elements in the evolution of the conflict including conflicting Israeli and Palestinian narratives and mythologies about the nature of the conflict. Among many issues to be addressed are: the relationship of this conflict to the history of European colonialism in the Middle East, the emergence of Pan-Arabism and Islamism, the various currents in Zionism and its relationship to Judaism, the implication of great power rivalry in the Middle East, the different causes and political repercussions of the four Arab-Israeli wars, efforts at peacemaking including Oslo and Camp David, and the significance of the two Palestinian uprisings.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: GOVT 3007
class title: China in Transition
description: This seminar, using faculty-directed research projects, is intended to survey China's transformation through revolution and reform since 1949, and to examine major issues under the themes of modernity and sustainability in the reform era.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS)

class: GOVT 3017
class title: Chinese Perspectives on International and Global Affairs
description: This course, offered by faculty members of Peking University's School of International Studies, provides Chinese perspectives on contemporary China's international relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: GOVT 3061
class title: Climate Politics in the US
description: Climate policy is one of the most important and contentious areas of politics in the US today. In this course we will consider climate change in the United States, identifying how political institutions, everyday people, and the physical environment come together to affect climate policy. This course will consider climate policy at the local and federal level, as well as examine how the US participates in international climate agreements. Students will critically analyze contemporary US climate policy; develop and addresses pertinent research questions; and learn how to conduct and communicate policy-relevant research.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3121
class title: Crime and Punishment
description: This is a class about the American criminal justice system—from policing to prisons, from arrest to reentry. In many ways, the operation of the modern criminal justice system is taken for granted, which frequently allows it to escape close scrutiny. But we will examine it in great detail, with a focus on how it came about, how it sustains itself, its many roles in society (only some of which involve crime and justice), and how and why it may be changing. In Fall 2022, the class will take a particular look at policing and examine the calls for police reform and abolition. NB: This class is designed to challenge your settled assumptions and dearly held myths about what is right and wrong with the system. Those who have made up their mind about criminal justice in America should not take the course. This class was formerly GOVT 3141, PRISONS, taught by Prof. Margulies. It has been renamed and renumbered as GOVT 3121 to distinguish it from the distance learning course taught by Prof. Katzenstein.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3122
class title: Democracy
description: The United States has been widely associated with democratic ideals, and yet American democracy has been long in the making, even in recent decades retaining hallmarks of an "unfinished work." It has evolved over time through an arduous and halting process, and it has not always moved in the direction of progress. How would we know if American democracy today was truly endangered and subject to "backsliding?" This course engages this question by grappling with what democracy means, how we can measure its attributes, and how we can assess whether they are robust or deteriorating. We focus on four key threats to democracy: political polarization; conflict over membership and status, particularly around race and gender; economic inequality; and the growth of executive power. We will consider the status of of free and fair elections, the rule of law, the legitimacy of the opposition, and the integrity of rights, including voting rights, civil rights, and civil liberties, studying how these features have developed historically and what happened in periods when they were under threat. We will also evaluate the contemporary political context by applying the same analytical tools.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3189
class title: Taking America's Pulse: Creating and Conducting a National Opinion Poll
description: In this course, students will design, conduct, and analyze a national-level public opinion survey. Students will determine all survey questions based on their research interests. All necessary survey research skills will be learned in the class.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3221
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: GOVT 3271
class title: Constitutional Law: An Introduction
description: In this course, we will examine one of the most important documents in American history – our Constitution.  Course topics will include the historical background of the document from the Magna Carta to the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation.  We will look at the creation of the Constitution, including the conflict between strong supporters of this proposed new Constitution (Federalists) and their opponents (Anti-Federalists). How did the Founders resolve their differences and what led the States to adopt a document limiting and balancing the powers of the President, Congress, and the Judiciary? We shall look at the constant tension (from the beginning to the present) over the balance of power between the three co-equal branches.  We shall discuss the role of the Constitution from both empirical and theoretical perspectives and look at how it has evolved from 1788 to the present day. Special attention will be paid to the use of Amendments, particularly the Bill of Rights, to address events/circumstances unforeseen by the drafters.  Finally, the course will discuss critical cases where the Supreme Court defined and redefined what the Constitution meant.
outcome: Students will identify key stakeholders in the formulation of the Constitution., Students will identify and discuss key cases in controversy in which the Supreme Court ruled to establish clear parameters on how the Constitution has been interpreted for more than 200 years with an emphasis on the Bill of Rights., Students will analyze why the Constitution remains such an important aspect an influence in American daily life., (graduate students) Assess the scholarly understanding of the role of the Constitution and Constitutional Law in American politics and policy., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3281
class title: Constitutional Politics
description: This course investigates the United States Supreme Court and its role in politics and government. It traces the development of constitutional doctrine, the growth of the Court's institutional power, and the Court's interaction with Congress, the president, and society. Discussed are major constitutional law decisions, their political contexts, and the social and behavioral factors that affect judges, justices, and federal court jurisprudence.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3293
class title: Comparative Politics of Latin America
description: This course is designed as an introduction to political, economic, and social issues in 20th century Latin America. Topics are organized chronologically, beginning with the crisis of agro-export economies and oligarchic rule in the 1930s, the onset of state-led development and mass politics in the 1930s and 40s, the military takeovers and revolutionary struggles of the 1960s and 70s, patterns of democratization and market liberalization in the 1980s and 90s, and the recent experience with populist and leftist governments in much of the region. Among the main issues covered are populism and corporatism, dependency theory and import-substitution industrialization, different patterns of authoritarian rule, social movements and revolution, democratic breakdowns and transitions, the debt crisis and market reforms, and U.S.-Latin American relations. Throughout the semester, we will draw on examples from the entire region, but focus on paradigmatic national cases. Knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese is not required.
 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3303
class title: Politics of the Global North
description: From a perspective based on comparative political economy, this course examines pressing contemporary issues such as the politics of growing inequality.  We consider conflicts around markets, democracy, economic and social justice, including the efforts of actors such as governments and labor unions aimed at economic recovery, reducing inequality, and the reform of national and global economic policy and institutions.  We also look at distinctive types of political and economic organization, especially in Europe and the United States, and the capacities of these societies to meet current economic, political, and social challenges, both domestic and international.

class: GOVT 3401
class title: Social Justice: Special Topics
description: Social Justice highlights refugee-led organizing and its intersections with un/documented and Indigenous beyond borders activism. We will work with and learn from refugee and asylum seekers led organizations that are started by and run by members of formerly displaced groups. These organizations build collectives and coalitions to organize communities across identities and legal categories and advocate for access to mobility and social justice. We will closely collaborate with these organizations and work on joint research projects.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: GOVT 3512
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3557
class title: Exceptionalism Questioned: America and Europe
description: Do you want to learn the discussion-based case method as taught at the Harvard Business School? Do you want to learn how to write a long research paper? Do you not want to take a final examination? If so this course may be for you. Since the beginning of the republic, American intellectuals, politicians and businessmen have extolled the exceptionalism of America. In a world of diverse forms of capitalism, can this view be sustained? Is America a shining city on the hill or a darkened city in the valley? Comparison is an effective way to discern and assess what is unique and what is general in the distinctive form of America's capitalist democracy. In this course the liberal market economy of the United States with its distinctive strengths and weaknesses is put side-by-side with different forms of liberal, corporatist and statist market economies that characterize different European countries in the emerging European polity. The diversity of capitalism points to one overarching conclusion: all of these countries are arguably capitalist, democratic market economies belonging to "the West;" and each of them has distinctive strengths and weaknesses. Like all other countries, America is ordinary in mobilizing its formidable capacities and displaying its glaring weaknesses as it copes with change. 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 3736
class title: Ancient Political Thought
description: Ancient political debates about democracy, empire, and justice appear in late fifth-century BCE Athenian dramatic, historical, and philosophical literatures composed against the backdrop of the 27-year Peloponnesian War over the control of Greece (which Athens lost). Reading selected tragedies of Euripides, comedies of Aristophanes, and philosophical dialogues of Plato, in combination with the history of Thucydides, this course retraces, explores, and interrogates these texts' complex, provocative, and surprisingly relevant arguments for and against the pursuit of equality (democracy), security (war and imperialism), goodness (aretê from "excellence" to "virtue"), and fairness (justice), and their often unexpected results in practice. All the readings for this course are in English.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS)

class: GOVT 3947
class title: Race and World Politics
description: This course introduces students to questions and debates around the role and effects of race and racism in international politics.  Scholars of international politics have long neglected such questions in world affairs, even though the origins of international relations – as an academic discipline – can be traced back to the early years of the 20th century, when questions of imperialism and governance over different races necessitated the development of new ways of thinking about inter-state and inter-racial relations. Over the past two decades, however, prompted by insights from post-colonial theory and cultural studies but also by continued Western military engagements in the Middle East and Africa, new scholarly publications have sought to bring back the analysis of "the color line" into our conversations about global politics. The major themes covered in this course include critical debates around the meanings and salience of race; colonialism; race and IR; decolonization and Third Worldism; race and war on/and terror; and race and international law and climate justice.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 4000
class title: Major Seminar
description: Major seminars in the Government department are small, advanced courses that cover an important theme or topic in contemporary politics in depth. Courses place particular emphasis on careful reading and classroom discussion, and students can expect to write a significant research paper. These courses are open to all Cornell students, but preference in admissions is given to seniors over juniors, and to Government majors over other students. Topics vary by semester and section. Fall 2024 Topics include: Empire and Black Radical Political Thought; Empire and (Anti)Colonial Violence; Feminisms: Simone de Beauvoir as Political Thinker; Pirates, Sailors, and Terrorists; Climate Change and International Security; Inequality and the Welfare State; Russian Politics. Spring 2025 Topics include: Equality; Martin Luther King, Jr.; Politics of Public Policy.

class: GOVT 4339
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: GOVT 4543
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 4827
class title: China, Tibet and Xinjiang
description: Seminar intended to examine the increasingly complex relationship that has evolved between China and the rest of the international system, with particular focus on the rise of Chinese nationalism and the extent to which those in Tibet, Xinjiang, and, to a lesser extent, Taiwan, are contesting such a trend. In so doing, the course emphasizes the interrelated, yet often contradictory, challenges facing Beijing in regards to the task of furthering the cause of national unity while promoting policies of integration with international society and interdependence with the global economy.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: GOVT 4949
class title: Honors Seminar: Thesis Clarification and Research
description: This seminar creates a structured environment in which honors students will examine different  research approaches and methods and construct a research design for their own theses—a thesis proposal that probes a new or inadequately researched question of importance to the discipline of political science or political theory. Apart from being a thesis writing workshop, the honors research class serves as a capstone course giving an overview of the different topics and methods addressed by students of politics. Members of the class will do extensive reading in published work relevant to their topics, and write a critical summary of that literature. Each member of the class will present their research design and central question(s) to the class for constructive criticism. By the end of the class, each honors student will have written the first chapter of the thesis, including the statement of the question, literature review, key definitions, methodology, and identification of data source(s). They will be working closely with an individual faculty adviser, as well as interacting with the research class. Students are strongly encouraged to examine some past honors theses on reserve at Kroch library in order to get an idea of the standards a government thesis must meet.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: acceptance into honors program.

class: GOVT 4998
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: GOVT 1111.

class: GOVT 4999
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study
description: One-on-one tutorial arranged by the student with a faculty member of his or her choosing. Open to government majors doing superior work, and it is the responsibility of the student to establish the research proposal and to find a faculty sponsor. Applicants for independent study must present a well-defined program of study that cannot be satisfied by pursuing courses in the regularly scheduled curriculum. No more than 4 credits of independent study may count toward fulfillment of the major. Students who elect to continue taking this course for more than one semester must select a new theme or subject each semester. Credit can be given only for work that results in a satisfactory amount of writing. Emphasis is on the capacity to subject a body of related readings to analysis and criticism. Keep in mind that independent study cannot be used to fulfill the seminar requirement. The application form for independent study must be completed at the beginning of the semester in which the course is being taken.

class: GOVT 6019
class title: Introduction to Probability and Applied Statistics
description: The goal of this course is to introduce probability and statistics as fundamental building blocks for quantitative political analysis, with regression modeling as a focal application. We will begin with a brief survey of probability theory, types of measurements, and descriptive statistics. The bulk of the course then addresses inferential statistics, covering in detail sampling, methods for estimating unknown quantities, and methods for evaluating competing hypotheses. We will see how to formally assess estimators, and some basic principles that help to ensure optimality. Along the way, we will introduce the use of regression models to specify social scientific hypotheses, and employ our expanding repertoire of statistical concepts to understand and interpret estimates based on our data. Weekly lab exercises require students to deploy the methods both 'by hand' so they can grasp the basic mathematics, and by computer to meet the conceptual demands of non-trivial examples and prepare for independent research. Some time will be spent reviewing algebra, calculus, and elementary logic, as well as introducing computer statistical packages.

class: GOVT 6067
class title: Field Seminar in International Relations
description: General survey of the literature and propositions of the international relations field. Criteria are developed for judging theoretical propositions and are applied to the major findings. Participants are expected to do extensive reading in the literature as well as research.

class: GOVT 6075
class title: Field Seminar in Political Thought
description: The seminar will explore readings in the history of political thought from Homer to the Twenty-first century.

class: GOVT 6122
class title: Foundations of the Social Sciences
description: Social science research almost always combines empirical observation (data), the construction of concepts (language), and the logical analysis of the relations between observations and concepts (statistics).  This course examines the relations between these three dimensions as the analyst moves from one to the other both as practice and in the crafting of a formal summary of findings and argument. We will be particularly interested in the foundational assumptions that underpin the connections between empirical reality, language, and statistical analysis. While these foundational assumptions are often taken for granted by social scientists, they vary dramatically between social science disciplines.  The implicit contradiction between that variance and their doxic acceptance within disciplines will be a primary focus of the course.

class: GOVT 6223
class title: Inequality and the Welfare State
description: How a society confronts and shapes socio-economic inequality depends largely on the policy tools at its disposal. A range of remedies – in areas as diverse as employment, education, health care, retirement, disability, housing, and parental leave – are available, yet different countries pursue alternative approaches to these issues. This seminar examines how politics shapes a government's social policy strategies. We will review the classic theories of welfare state variation emerging from Western Europe, how they shed light on the American approach to social policy, and to what extent they apply outside affluent democracies. We also will consider whether existing social policies can adapt to emerging issues, such as those posed by the gig economy and climate change.

class: GOVT 6271
class title: Constitutional Law: An Introduction
description: In this course, we will examine one of the most important documents in American history – our Constitution.  Course topics will include the historical background of the document from the Magna Carta to the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation.  We will look at the creation of the Constitution, including the conflict between strong supporters of this proposed new Constitution (Federalists) and their opponents (Anti-Federalists). How did the Founders resolve their differences and what led the States to adopt a document limiting and balancing the powers of the President, Congress, and the Judiciary? We shall look at the constant tension (from the beginning to the present) over the balance of power between the three co-equal branches.  We shall discuss the role of the Constitution from both empirical and theoretical perspectives and look at how it has evolved from 1788 to the present day. Special attention will be paid to the use of Amendments, particularly the Bill of Rights, to address events/circumstances unforeseen by the drafters.  Finally, the course will discuss critical cases where the Supreme Court defined and redefined what the Constitution meant.
 
outcome: Students will identify key stakeholders in the formulation of the Constitution., Students will identify and discuss key cases in controversy in which the Supreme Court ruled to establish clear parameters on how the Constitution has been interpreted for more than 200 years with an emphasis on the Bill of Rights., Students will analyze why the Constitution remains such an important aspect an influence in American daily life., (graduate students) Assess the scholarly understanding of the role of the Constitution and Constitutional Law in American politics and policy., 

class: GOVT 6284
class title: Culture, Religion, and Politics
description: What types of political outcomes can religion and culture help explain? What political and social factors affect religious identity and institutions? This course is designed to provide graduate students with an overview of theoretical approaches to the study of religion and culture in the social sciences. This course has three objectives. First, students will be able to identify traditional ways in which religion and culture have been theorized and operationalized in political science. Second, students will use empirical evidence to evaluate these theories and measurement strategies and assess potential threats to inference. Finally, students will complete their own research project on the relationship between politics and religion.

class: GOVT 6294
class title: Parties, Movements, and Populism: Crises of Democratic Representation
description: Political scientists have long studied parties, social movements, and populism, but these topics have generally belonged to separate branches of the discipline, each boasting a specialized body of literature with distinct theoretical cornerstones.  In the real world, however, these phenomena interact with each other in complex ways that defy their analytical compartmentalization.  Over the past decade, political and economic crises in Latin America, Europe, and the United States have forced scholars to recognize these intersections, as social movements and populist leaders have challenged mainstream parties, founded new ones, and undermined traditional party systems. This course explores these intersections, recognizing that parties, populism, and social movements are all different ways—more or less institutionalized and contentious—by which societal interests get represented in the political arena.

class: GOVT 6353
class title: Field Seminar in Comparative Politics
description: This seminar is an overview of the field of comparative politics targeting Ph.D. students in the Government department. This course introduces students to classic works as well as recent contributions that build upon those works. Readings draw from leading theoretical approaches—including structural, institutional, rational choice, and cultural perspectives—and cover a broad range of substantive topics, such as regime types, democratization, states and civil society, political economy, violence, mobilization, voting, and representation.

class: GOVT 6512
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 

class: GOVT 6543
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.

class: GOVT 6619
class title: Text and Networks in Social Science Research
description: This is a course on networks and text in quantitative social science. The course will cover published research using text and social network data, focusing on health, politics, and everyday life, and it will introduce methods and approaches for incorporating high-dimensional data into familiar research designs. Students will evaluate past studies and propose original research.
outcome: Learn to critically evaluate empirical research that uses text as data or social network analysis., Connect fundamentals of research design to high-dimensional data analysis., Develop verbal and written skills via in-class discussion, presentations, and written assignments., Learn to represent complex relationships quantitatively and conduct high-dimensional data analyses using statistical programming., Learn methods for avoiding over-fitting in high-dimensional data analysis., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 6760 or GOVT 6029 or SOC 6020 or equivalent.

class: GOVT 6827
class title: China, Tibet and Xinjiang
description: This seminar is intended to examine the increasingly complex relationship that has evolved between China and the rest of the international system, with particular focus on the rise of Chinese nationalism and the extent to which those in Tibet, Xinjiang, and, to a lesser extent, Taiwan, are contesting such a trend. In so doing, the course emphasizes the interrelated, yet often contradictory, challenges facing Beijing in regards to the task of furthering the cause of national unity while promoting policies of integration with international society and interdependence with the global economy.  

class: GOVT 6856
class title: The Politics of Affect
description: This course examines the role that affect plays in politics and, especially, social movements. We will read about various interdisciplinary approaches to affect and public emotions before focusing on particular feelings like love, anger, fear, envy, grief, depression, resentment, hope, melancholia, and optimism. In doing so, we will ask: what does it mean to study, document, and historicize political affects? How can certain moods become resources for political action? Why and when do revolutionary energies increase or deplete? Possible readings include: Raymond Williams, Audre Lorde, Vivian Gornick, Lorraine Hansberry.

class: GOVT 6998
class title: Experiential Learning in Policy Making in Washington, DC
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an experiential learning class that focuses on engaging with the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purposes are to give students to build their understanding of their internship work by analyzing and reflecting on that work, understanding the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that that world uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events.
outcome: Students will have employed experiential learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 

class: GOVT 7937
class title: Proseminar in Peace Studies
description: The Proseminar in Peace Studies offers a multidisciplinary review of issues related to peace and conflict at the graduate level. The course is led by the director of the Judith Reppy Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies and is based on the Institute's weekly seminar series, featuring outside visitors and Cornell faculty. 

class: GOVT 7998
class title: Independent Study - PIRIP

class: GOVT 7999
class title: Independent Study
description: Individualized readings and research for graduate students. Topics, readings, and writing requirements are designed through consultation between the student and the instructor. Graduate students in government who are looking to use this as an option to fulfill their course requirements should check with their chairs to be certain that the program of study is acceptable for this purpose. Applications must be completed and signed by the instructor and by the chairs of their special committees. They are available from, and must be returned to, the graduate assistant in 212 White Hall.

class: GRAD 9000
class title: Non-Degree Study

class: GRAD 9010
class title: Graduate-Level Research

class: GRAD 9011
class title: Doctoral Dissertation Research

class: GRAD 9012
class title: Master's Thesis Research

class: GREEK 1101
class title: Elementary Ancient Greek I
description: Introduction to Attic Greek. Designed to enable the student to read the ancient authors as soon as possible.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: GREEK 1105
class title: Homeric Greek II
description: This course continues the introduction to the vocabulary and grammar of Homeric Greek began in GREEK 1104, or similar courses. By the end of this course, students will be reading substantial, unaltered passages from Homer's Iliad.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GREEK 1104.

class: GREEK 2101
class title: Intermediate Ancient Greek I
description: Combines reading of classical Greek prose texts with systematic review of forms presented in GREEK 1102, study of advanced grammar, vocabulary-building and sight-reading exercises.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GREEK 1102 or placement by departmental exam.

class: GREEK 3120
class title: Seminar in Greek
description: Undergraduate seminar in Greek. Fall 2024 topic: Family intrigue in Herodotus and Lysias. Spring 2025 topic: Euripides' Herakles, Plato's Euthyphro. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one 2000-level Greek course.

class: GREEK 3185
class title: Independent Study in Greek, Undergraduate Level
description: May be taken upon completion of one semester of work at the 3000-level. To be taken only in exceptional circumstances. Must be arranged by the student with their advisor and the faculty member who has agreed to direct the study. To be approved by the DUS.

class: GREEK 4411
class title: Greek Comparative Grammar
description: The prehistory and evolution of the sounds and forms of ancient Greek as reconstructed by comparison with the other Indo-European languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: thorough familiarity with morphology of classical Greek.

class: GREEK 5111
class title: Elementary Ancient Greek I
description: Introduction to Ancient Greek. Designed to enable the student to read the ancient authors as soon as possible.

class: GREEK 5115
class title: Homeric Greek II
description: This course continues the introduction to the vocabulary and grammar of Homeric Greek.  By the end of this course, students will be reading substantial, unaltered passages from Homer's Iliad. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GREEK 5114, or permission of instructor.

class: GREEK 5121
class title: Intermediate Ancient Greek I
description: Combines reading of classical Greek prose texts with systematic review of forms presented in GREEK 5112, study of advanced grammar, vocabulary-building and sight-reading exercises.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GREEK 5112 or placement by departmental exam. 

class: GREEK 5130
class title: Seminar in Greek
description: Fall 2024 topic: Family intrigue in Herodotus and Lysias. Spring 2025 topic: Euripides' Herakles, Plato's Euthyphro. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GREEK 5121 or GREEK 5123.

class: GREEK 6101
class title: Advanced Readings in Greek Literature
description: Topic: Rhetoric: Gorgias, Lysias, Cicero (Pro Caelio)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduates must have had two semesters of 3000-level Greek.

class: GREEK 7161
class title: Greek Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Greek Philosophical texts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of Greek is essential.

class: GREEK 7171
class title: Graduate Seminar in Greek
description: Topic: Plutarch on women.

class: GREEK 7411
class title: Greek Comparative Grammar
description: The prehistory and evolution of the sounds and forms of ancient Greek as reconstructed by comparison with the other Indo-European languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: thorough familiarity with morphology of classical Greek.

class: GREEK 7910
class title: Independent Study in Greek
description: Independent study in Greek for graduate students.

class: HADM 1150
class title: Organizational Behavior and Leadership Skills
description: This course provides students with the theoretical lenses and interpersonal skills required to become effective leaders of themselves and others at all organizational levels. With a particular emphasis on the hospitality industry, students develop an understanding and appreciation of the complexities of leading and managing individuals, teams and organizations, and acquire practical tools for accomplishing personal leadership and organizational goals within a service-based framework. Topics include understanding individual differences, leveraging conflict management, applying team-based problem-solving, understanding power and influence dynamics, principles of motivation, coaching and leadership, understanding of group process, and ethics.  The course emphasizes practical application of all concepts to students' personal and professional lives and goals, with particular emphasis on work-life in hospitality and broadly, service contexts. Students learn through the use of case studies, self-assessments, experiential exercises, readings, discussions, papers, and group activities.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 2.3: Students will demonstrate productive team behaviors., PLO 3.1: Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., PLO 4.1: Students will describe their personal strengths and development needs related to hospitality management., PLO 4.2: Students will identify the personal goals and learning opportunities required for continued personal and professional development., 

class: HADM 1198
class title: Hotelie LaunchPad I: Maximizing and Leveraging the Cornell Experience

class: HADM 1210
class title: Financial Accounting
description: An introduction to financial accounting that studies transaction analysis, the balance sheet, income statement, statement of cash flows, and the statement of stockholder's equity. Accounting for investments, receivables, inventories, tangible and intangible assets, liabilities, long term bonds and capital stock transactions are studied. Basic financial ratios are introduced and interpreted. Ethical issues related to financial reporting are also discussed. Students who complete this course will have the pre-requisite knowledge to take HADM 2210  Managerial Accounting and HADM 2220 Finance.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 4.1: Students will describe their personal strengths and development needs related to hospitality management., PLO 4.2: Students will identify the personal goals and learning opportunities required for continued personal and professional development., 

class: HADM 1350
class title: Introduction to Hotel Operations
description: This course will cover two broad topics: I) an overview of the hotel industry, and II) the operations of the Rooms Division of a hotel.   It will also serve as a 'survey course' by introducing a wide range of topics that students will study in more depth in future courses.  
outcome: Introduce students to the hotel industry, the different players, types of hotels, and types of customers., Review performance metrics, including topline revenue metrics and bottom-line profit metrics., Examine the operations of a hotel, with a detailed focus on the Rooms Division, especially the areas of Front Desk and Housekeeping., Discuss current issues facing the hospitality industry., Practice applying key concepts to real-world hotel operations, via the Hotel Practicum, where students will 'shadow' employees of the Statler Hotel., Prepare students for an enlightening and memorable undergraduate experience at Cornell, and then a successful and impactful career in the hospitality industry., 

class: HADM 1361
class title: Principles of Food and Beverage Operations Management
description: In this course students are introduced to the principles of food and beverage operations management. Attention is focused on market segments and industry structure with an emphasis on product and systems differentiation. Course goals include a conceptual understanding of, and the practical application of (e.g., lab activities), the components of foodservice systems: menu and product development and management, production, service, controls, financial analysis, food safety, ethics, and quality assurance.
outcome: Understand the major industry market segments and their basic operating characteristics., Utilize the language and concepts of restaurant operations to identify different organizational structures and the forces shaping them domestically and internationally., Identify and apply foodservice management concepts in an experience-based, production setting to cover topics including food safety, quality assurance, and cost controls., Calculate and interpret financial performance metrics and statements and explain how they impact decision making., Explore the importance of human relations and interactions in food and beverage operations, including the philosophy of service and hospitality., Identify and analyze ethical challenges in the industry as well as the impact of management decisions on all stakeholders., 

class: HADM 1650
class title: Business Writing for Hospitality Professionals
description: Introduces the role and importance of effective communication in managerial work, especially in the hospitality industry. Students develop abilities in analytical thinking and clear expression. With an emphasis on business writing, this course builds foundational skills for creating professional-level communications. Students plan, develop, and produce increasingly complex written communications and deliver oral presentations.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.2: Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., PLO 3.1: Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., 

class: HADM 1740
class title: Business Computing
description: This course covers how to use the Microsoft Office productivity suite to analyze and solve business problems, answer business questions and promote effective personal and professional brand management. The overall objective of the course is to illustrate how to use software to promote competitive advantage in three ways: (1) Students will use Word to learn how to efficiently create professional documents that are both appealing and standardized in order to build brand recognition. (2) Students will learn how to use Power Point to visually convey complex information to stakeholders in a manner that promotes shared understanding. (3) Students will use Excel to organize data, transform data into information, and model a complex business problem.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.4: Students will demonstrate effective use of information technology., PLO 4.2: Students will identify the personal goals and learning opportunities required for continued personal and professional development., 

class: HADM 1810
class title: Introduction to Management
description: This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts and topics associated with managing and leading organizations, groups, and individuals. The traditional functions of management (planning, organizing, leading, and controlling) are discussed, with special attention paid to current workplace issues and developments, such as corporate social responsibility, ethics, and diversity.

class: HADM 1910
class title: Distinguished Lectures in Hospitality Management
description: The Dean's Distinguished Lecture Series is a long-standing School tradition that provides a unique opportunity for successful industry leaders to share their experiences with Cornell students. In its 92-year history, the Dean's Distinguished Lecture Series has hosted the most influential and accomplished leaders from every segment of the hospitality industry. Speakers share their views about successful management styles, possible career paths, critical industry-related issues, and qualities conducive to successful business leadership. Students have an unparalleled opportunity to learn and question how hospitality leaders view the current and future status of the industry.

class: HADM 2011
class title: Hospitality Quantitative Analysis
description: This introductory statistics course is taught from the perspective of solving problems and making decisions within the hospitality industry. Students learn introductory probability, as well as how to gather data, evaluate the quality of data, graphically represent data, and apply some fundamental statistical methodologies. Statistical methods covered include: estimation and hypothesis testing relating to one- and two-sample problems of means, simple linear regression, and multiple regression. Excel is used as the statistical computing software and the class uses a very hands-on approach.
outcome: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., Students will demonstrate effective use of information technology., 
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1740 or HADM 2740.

class: HADM 2021
class title: Critical Thinking and Mathematical Modeling in Operations
description: Operations management is the study of how things work. In this class, we will discuss how operations management can be used to help a hospitality company compete. After completing this course, you will: (1) understand core concepts, models and managerial issues in service operations management, (2) critically assess the performance of service delivery processes, (3) learn how to manage supply and demand, (4) learn how to manage quality, (5) develop proficiency in a range of quantitative and qualitative techniques necessary for hospitality service organizations, (6) learn how to manage a project, and (7) apply the concepts and techniques learned in class to the analysis of real-world service delivery processes.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.2: Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., PLO 2.3: Students will demonstrate productive team behaviors., PLO 2.4: Students will demonstrate effective use of information technology., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2011 or STSCI 2100 or ILRST 2100 or MATH 1710 or AEM 2100.

class: HADM 2210
class title: Managerial Accounting
description: This course focuses on the use of accounting information for management decision making and control in hospitality settings. Topics include costing objects, budgeting, financial decision making, cost behavior, and management control systems. There will be one common final exam at the end of the semester.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 3.1: Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., PLO 3.2: Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1210 or HADM 2230 or AEM 2210. 

class: HADM 2220
class title: Finance
description: This course provides an introduction to core ideas in finance as well as a foundation for further study.  Upon completion of this course students should be able to (1) perform basic valuation of cash flows from projects, bonds, and stocks; (2) demonstrate basic understanding of capital budgeting decisions through the use of concepts including the time value of money and discounted cash flow analysis; (3) assess the relation between risk and return and integrate that knowledge in determining corporate cost of capital; and (4) demonstrate an understanding of the role of debt and equity in corporate capital structure.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1210 or HADM 2230.

class: HADM 2221
class title: Principles of Hospitality Real Estate
description: This course emphasizes practical valuation and decision-making skills. You will receive an introduction to the business of hospitality and commercial real estate, including content on the major roles, activities and players, terminology, and how the relevant financial tools, institutional concepts, and economic models are used for sound investment decision-making.
outcome: Examine hospitality (and other commercial) real estate markets to assess suitable investment opportunities given local demand, supply, and real estate price dynamics., Develop cash flow projections based on your market analysis and the operating characteristics of the investment property (based on the Uniform System of Accounts for the Lodging Industry)., Analyze financing options under standard fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgages in order to assess the impact of financing choices on (hospitality) real estate investments., Use industry-standard tools to make investment decisions based on your market and property-level analysis and assess investment risks, including considerations around financing and taxation., Assess the profitability of renovation, refinancing, or disposition options available to the investor during the holding period of the property., Understand the basics of indirect investment in (hospitality) real estate through listed real estate investment trusts (equity) and real estate debt securities (CMBS)., Identify the relevant practical legal concepts that govern the ownership of (hospitality) real estate., Evaluate the impact of management contracts and franchise agreements on real estate owners in the lodging industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2220 or HADM 2250 or AEM 2240 or AEM 2241.

class: HADM 2230
class title: Financial Accounting Principles
description: This introduction to financial accounting covers the preparation of financial statements, from transactional analysis through journal entries to financial statement presentation. We will do in-depth analysis of receivables and payables, revenue and expenses, and major balance sheet items, such as inventory, investments, long term bonds, capital stock, and tangible and intangible assets. We will study preparation of the statement of cash flows using both the direct and indirect methods. Along the way we will introduce some of the concepts of financial statement analysis. We will also discuss ethics in accounting and business. Students will work in teams for some of the time. After successful completion of this course you will be prepared to take an intermediate accounting course.

class: HADM 2250
class title: Finance
description: This course provides an introduction to core ideas in finance as well as a foundation for further study. Upon completion of this course students should be able to (1) perform basic valuation of cash flows from projects, bonds, and stocks; (2) demonstrate basic understanding of capital budgeting decisions through the use of concepts including the time value of money and discounted cash flow analysis; (3) assess the relation between risk and return and integrate that knowledge in determining corporate cost of capital; and (4) demonstrate an understanding of the role of debt and equity in corporate capital structure.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2230 and ECON 1110 or equivalent. Recommended prerequsite: STSCI 2100 or equivalent.

class: HADM 2351
class title: Restaurant Management
description: This course covers concepts, issues, and business principles relevant to the restaurant industry, including market analysis, menu and service systems, and financial and operational management and applies them in a real-life restaurant setting. Students conceptualize and manage the operations of an in-person restaurant open to the Cornell community and evaluate the process and outcomes. Successful completion of the course requires students to complete TiPS and ServSafe certifications shortly after the start of the semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1361.

class: HADM 2410
class title: Marketing Principles
description: This is a foundational marketing course that includes the study of concepts, activities, and decisions related to the exchange process, managing the marketing mix, and development of marketing strategy in for-profit and not-for-profit organizations. Students learn about basic principles of marketing management, with a special focus on the service industry. Emphasis is placed upon how the concepts and ideas might be applied to various marketing decision-making situations.

class: HADM 2430
class title: Marketing Management for Services
description: Students develop an understanding of marketing management for hospitality and related service organizations: the process through which organizations analyze, plan, implement, and control programs to develop and maintain beneficial exchanges with target buyers. Students learn about marketing management through a mix of readings, lectures, class discussions, individual and group exercises, industry guest speakers, and exams.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze hospitality marketing challenges., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate hospitality marketing challenges and will formulate solutions based on principles from multiple management disciplines., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: HADM 1410.

class: HADM 2560
class title: Fundamentals of Hospitality Development and Management
description: This course provides an overview of the operation of hospitality facilities, including operating costs for various types of facilities, types and characteristics of major building systems, sustainable aspects of building equipment and management, and the responsibilities of the engineering maintenance department. The renovation needs and key managerial aspects of hospitality facility renovation projects are examined. Students are introduced to the issues and opportunities inherent in the development and planning of hospitality facilities, specifically hotels and restaurants. Course components include the project development sequence, conceptual and space planning, architectural design criteria, construction management, and the interpretation of architectural design and consultant drawings. There is an emphasis on setting appropriate facilities requirements, understanding industry practice, and implementing properties decisions within a balanced design, operations, and financial framework.
outcome: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., Students will create professional-quality written business documents., Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: HADM 1350.

class: HADM 2810
class title: Human Resources Management
description: Facilitates an understanding of the policies, procedures, and systems required to attract, select, develop, and retain quality employees. Students learn about the major environmental factors that affect the HR function, including legislation, economics, and demographics. The course emphasizes HR issues and challenges that are particularly relevant to the hospitality industry. Instruction is based on lecture, discussion, and experiential activities, as well as case analysis and project work.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1150.

class: HADM 3010
class title: Service Operations Management
description: Operations management is the study of how things work. In this class, we will discuss how operations management can be used to help a hospitality company compete. After completing this course, you will: (1) understand core concepts, models and managerial issues in service operations management, (2) critically assess the performance of service delivery processes, (3) learn how to manage supply and demand, (4) learn how to manage quality, (5) develop proficiency in a range of quantitative and qualitative techniques necessary for hospitality service organizations, (6) learn how to manage a project, and (7) apply the concepts and techniques learned in class to the analysis of real-world service delivery processes.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.2: Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., PLO 2.3: Students will demonstrate productive team behaviors., PLO 2.4: Students will demonstrate effective use of information technology., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2010. 

class: HADM 3120
class title: Experiential Networking I
description: In this interactive course, students will learn the different types and ways to network, how to create their own personal branding statement, best practices on how to reach out to someone you have not met before, ways to master the basics of video communications, and how to share and utilize their networks. This course expands student life and networking skills to add value and grow their knowledge, interpersonal/people skills, and experience to succeed in business and life.
outcome: Students will begin to understand what networking is, identify and explain different networking styles and techniques, and identify their own style., Students will start to discuss and analyze best practices, be aware of their natural style and ways they can enhance their style or leverage their natural strength and adopt characteristics of different styles., Students will start to identify their core strengths and understand why these matters, home in on what they love and want to do, differentiate themselves by tying their strengths to results, and use persuasive communication techniques to start creating a powerful and compelling personal positioning statement., Students will be able to build specific action items, have more confidence and insights into how to reach out and network on various platforms, gauge the right timing for follow-up, and understand ways to execute their plan., Students should be able to use best practices while using technology (video, audio, internet connection), including ensuring they have a proper background, are prepared for discussion, and present themselves properly to build relationships regardless of the medium., Students will be able to understand who their current network connections are, how to utilize those connections to build and strengthen relationships as well as expand their networks and share them with others., 

class: HADM 3135
class title: Conversations with Entrepreneurs
description: This course will guide students to answer the fundamental question: "Why Entrepreneurialism? Is it the right path for me?".  Many people say they want to start a business but don't expect and desire the authority and responsibility that comes with it. The objective of this course is to both broaden students' thinking about what constitutes the field of entrepreneurial endeavor – and to sharpen their focus on the unique attributes they bring to the table in considering launching entrepreneurial ventures of their own in the future.

class: HADM 3230
class title: Introduction to Investments
description: This course discusses a wide range of investments-related topics. We study basic frameworks that provide investors guidance on how to value securities and make investment decisions; topics include basic concepts of return, risk, and prices, asset allocations, the capital asset pricing model, and performance evaluation. Our approach emphasizes both conceptual foundations and practical implementation. The course includes an extensive module on strategic asset allocation that includes a discussion of alternative investments. We cover various topics in active portfolio management, and in particular study equity screening and multi-factor models. The course highlights trends in the investment management industry and introduces terminology and tools familiar to investment professionals.
outcome: Course will deepen the students' understanding of the core principles behind investment and Portfolio Management., Students will be able to create portfolios across asset classes, and learn how assets are priced through general equilibrium price theory., Students will gain an understanding of basic active portfolio management techniques., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2220, HADM 2250 or equivalent.

class: HADM 3310
class title: Environmental, Social and Governance Strategy in the Food and Beverage Industry
description: Through carefully selected readings, insightful case studies, and engaging discussions with industry experts, this course delves into the strategic challenges faced by food and beverage firms within the Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) framework. Through critical analysis of real-world cases, students gain a deeper understanding of leadership and development strategies relevant to the food and beverage industry and its role in shaping a sustainable global food system, with a strong focus on integrating ESG principles.

class: HADM 3350
class title: Restaurant Management
description: This course covers concepts, issues, and business principles relevant to the restaurant industry, including market analysis, menu and service systems, and financial and operational management and applies them in a real-life restaurant setting. Students conceptualize and manage the operations of an in-person restaurant open to the Cornell community and evaluate the process and outcomes.  Successful completion of the course requires students to complete TiPS and ServSafe certifications shortly after the start of the semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1361 or HADM 2360.

class: HADM 3610
class title: Communication for Entrepreneurs
description: Communication skills are essential for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs face unique communication challenges when communicating with initial investors, business partners, founding employees, first customers, and the media. Students will apply course concepts to their own ideas while developing communication competencies in a variety of entrepreneurial communication contexts.
distribution categories: (SSC-HA)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1650 or equivalent, for undergraduate students only.

class: HADM 3640
class title: Corporate Communication
description: How you communicate as a leader will determine your ability to convey ideas, manage teams, win support, and get promoted within an organization. This course analyzes how companies handle crisis communication, work with the media, manage change, and inspire employees. With an emphasis on current events, we'll study both traditional communication methods and communication technologies. Expect written assignments and highly interactive presentations to build your communication skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1650 or waiver; non-SHA undergraduates: completion of their college's writing requirement.

class: HADM 3650
class title: Persuasive Business Communication for Hospitality Leaders
description: Develops the knowledge and skills that hospitality managers need to face an array of persuasive communication challenges. This course builds on the principles of effective managerial communication (HADM 1650) and organizational behavior and interpersonal skills (HADM 1150). The course introduces the theory and principles of persuasion and focuses on their application in a range of management and leadership contexts.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.2: Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., PLO 4.1: Students will describe their personal strengths and development needs related to hospitality management., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1150 and HADM 1650.

class: HADM 3710
class title: Python Programming
description: Introduction to programming in Python with an emphasis on Hospitality applications. No previous programming experience is required. Topics covered include programming basics, file input and output, Excel integration, database integration, and data analysis.
outcome: Basic proficiency in programming., Basic proficiency in Python programming., The ability to create Python programs that can read from and write to files., The ability to create Python programs that integrate closely with Excel®., The ability to create Python programs that integrate closely with databases., The ability to create Python programs for analyzing data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1740 or HADM 2740.

class: HADM 3870
class title: Business and Hospitality Law
description: Provides students with an integrated presentation of employment discrimination, tort, and contract concepts as they apply to the legal aspects of hospitality management. Students examine relevant federal and state cases and statutes. The overall objective is to enable students to recognize, analyze, and evaluate legal issues for the purpose of making and articulating appropriate decisions in the workplace.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., PLO 1.2: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and will formulate a solution based on principles from at least two management disciplines., PLO 3.1: Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., 

class: HADM 4070
class title: Hospitality Operations and Consulting
description: This course focuses on advanced, operations-related, analytical tools that can be applied in hospitality operations. These tools are best suited to either people working as internal consultants (i.e., analysts) or external consultants (for consulting firms). There are two main focuses: (1) benchmarking and best practice analysis; and (2) service processes. This course also examines the practices of firms offering hospitality operations consulting.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2010 or HADM 2011 or equivalent.

class: HADM 4100
class title: Hospitality Management Seminar
description: HADM 4100 complements HADM 1910 by providing students with an extraordinary opportunity to interact with leaders in the hospitality industry in a limited-enrollment seminar. Students and guest speakers participate in roundtable discussions to gain a better understanding of industry trends, challenges, and opportunities.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: HADM 1910.

class: HADM 4130
class title: Entrepreneurial Management
description: This course addresses the issues faced by managers who wish to take a nascent idea and turn it into a viable organization that creates value, and empowers students to develop their own approaches, guidelines, and skills for being entrepreneurial managers.

class: HADM 4140
class title: Innovation and Corporate Renewal
description: Innovation is increasingly the source of sustainable competitive advantage for firms around the world. However, building an organization to successfully and repeatedly bring innovations to market has proven to be a challenge for many companies. This course explores the practices and processes that managers use to manage innovation effectively. This course also explores four aspects of innovation: exploring, executing, leveraging and renewing innovation.

class: HADM 4144
class title: Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset
description: Opportunity recognition is the very basis from which entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial activity begins. Research shows that opportunity recognition is a learned behavior and as such this course will also seek to provide students with a better understanding of opportunity recognition through an exploration of the skills, tools, and mindset to generate new business ideas. Heavy emphasis on market validation and value proposition design throughout the course.

class: HADM 4200
class title: Principles of Real Estate
description: This introduction to real estate finance and investment emphasizes developing valuation and decision-making skills. It introduces students to the business of real estate, including major roles, activities and players, terminology, and how the relevant financial tools, institutional concepts, and economic models are used in for sound investment decision-making in real estate.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2230 or equivalent, and HADM 2250 or equivalent.

class: HADM 4205
class title: Real Estate Financial Modeling
description: This course covers the basic financial models and frameworks used throughout the real estate industry today. In this introductory course, students will focus exclusively on a rigorous cash flow construction and scenario analysis to include the impact of deterministic inputs in ex-ante decision making. The course covers extensively the modeling of simple lease structures (for different property types), conventional and exotic debt instruments and simple equity waterfalls.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2221 or HADM 3210 or HADM 4200.

class: HADM 4230
class title: Hospitality Real Estate Finance
description: Focuses on real estate financing for hospitality-oriented projects. Lectures address the following topics: methods of measuring rates of return; feasibility and appraisal processes; equity and debt financing vehicles to include joint ventures, limited partnerships, construction mortgages, and participating, convertible, and seller-financed mortgages; forms of operating agreements to include management contracts, leases, and franchises; and trends in international hotel franchising. Presentations by hospitality industry real estate practitioners tie course material to current industry practices.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2221 or HADM 3210 or HADM 4200 

class: HADM 4235
class title: Cornell Real Estate Case Competition Course
description: Each year, Cornell organizes in November the Cornell International Real Estate Case Competition (CIRECC). The top 20 undergraduate academic real estate programs in the world enter teams of six real estate students to compete in this exciting and enriching academic event. Students in this class learn how to effectively pitch a commercial real estate transaction to a panel of senior real estate professionals. A team of six is then sent to the actual competition to represent Cornell. During the competition, teams will be judged not only on their investment recommendations, their approach to the problem, and their presentation skills, but also on their ability to answer and response to direct and probing questions posed by the judges. Students should be advised that the workload will be extensive and will involve working on numerous practice cases as a team and developing individual presentation skills.

class: HADM 4250
class title: Securitization and Structured Financial Products
description: Deals with the structure and analysis of securitized financial products with an emphasis on residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS). The course is intended for those who wish to acquire a working knowledge of the analysis of such securities (e.g., collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial MBS, auto loans, and credit card-backed securities) and an understanding of the securitization process. The course's subject matter necessitates a highly analytic and quantitative approach, and students are required to have a strong background in finance and economics.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2221, HADM 3210 or HADM 4200 or permission of instructor.

class: HADM 4260
class title: Advanced Corporate Finance
description: The focus of this course is the application of corporate finance theory to real-life corporations. This will be accomplished through discussions of the theoretical and empirical work as well as hands-on analysis of real-life cases regarding corporate finance issues that face managers. The primary topics covered are: payout policy, capital structure and related financing choices, the role of venture capital financing, the decision to go-public, the impact of agency problems between firm management and security holders and between different classes of security holders on corporate governance and different ways of solving such agency problems, as well as mergers/takeovers and other restructuring decisions. One of the aims of the course is to develop students' ability to make judgments in a realistic setting. In addition, students are expected to develop their capacity to articulate judgments both orally and in writing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1210, HADM 2220, and HADM 2010 or equivalent.

class: HADM 4265
class title: Mastering Strategy Execution: Control Systems to Win
description: This course gives you the tools to execute a winning strategy. Once strategy is defined, managers must allocate scarce resources among units and hold people accountable for those resources. Managers must use performance measurement and control systems to direct and motivate desired behaviors and monitor progress against the previously defined strategy.
outcome: How to design an effective organization to win in the current competitive environment., How to identify the organization's primary customer., How the process of resource allocation among organizational units., How to design core values to provide guidance for decision making throughout the organization., How to develop and implement systems to measure and monitor organizational performance., 

class: HADM 4300
class title: Introduction to Wines
description: Students will be introduced to the major wine-producing regions of the world. The course focuses on understanding the terms on a wine label, discussing aromas and flavors and connecting flavors to the growing and productions factors that influence them. Food and wine pairing, wine etiquette and responsible consumption are also topics. This forms the basis for what a consumer needs to know to confidently navigate a wine list and to make sound purchase decisions in retail wine shops or online.
distribution categories: (ALC-HA)

class: HADM 4315
class title: Nonprofit Social Enterprise and Food Justice
description: This course will provide an overview of nonprofit social enterprise and food justice through service-learning, with a focus on food systems, social ventures and economic policies. Key objectives include identifying management best practices for leading nonprofit food service organizations, including strategy, managing employees/volunteers, fundraising, grant proposal writing, board governance, and marketing and social media. Through lectures, class discussions, case study analysis, research, community service practicums, and a service learning final project working with a partner organization, students will explore the economic, social, and political issues of combating poverty and hunger in the United States. The focus of the course will be on nonprofit food service organizations designed to combat hunger in our communities such as food banks, soup kitchens and shelters, community outreach organizations, school feeding programs, and social change through advocacy. Contingent university travel guidelines in the fall, a field trip may be required.
outcome: Identify some of the causes and consequences of hunger and food security in the United States, including methods of measuring availability and accessibility of food in communities., Identify critical means of providing healthy, nutritious, and affordable meals for underserved populations, such as children and the elderly., Compare emergency food programs, federal food, and nutrition assistance and the community food security movement, and assess strengths and limitations of each., Gain comparative and holistic knowledge of today's food systems (production, distribution, consumption, and waste) with an emphasis on food system system problems and possible solutions., Define and explain social entrepreneurship and social innovation., Outline key financial issues facing food service nonprofit organizations, including identifying various sources of fundraising for nonprofit food service organizations and identify key components of a compelling grant proposal., Outline methods for assessing nonprofit performance in the food service industry., Articulate connections between hunger, health, and food service systems that are designed to combat these social issues., Describe key legal issues facing food service nonprofit organizations (such as food safety and sanitation guidelines)., Explore and establish networking connections with nonprofit food service organizations through a service learning project., 
distribution categories: (GLC-HA, SCD-HA) (D-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: HADM 1360, or equivalent food service management course, or permission of instructor.

class: HADM 4340
class title: Catering and Special Events Management
description: The catering and special events industries are among the fastest-growing segments within the hospitality industry. This course focuses on off-premise and on-premise catering for social and business functions and the management of large-scale independent events, such as sporting events, artistic performances, and product launches. Topics include organizational structure, legal aspects of catering and special events management, product and service development, marketing and sales, catered function and special event planning and execution, staff recruitment and training, post-event analysis, and financial success of catering.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2360.

class: HADM 4360
class title: Beverage Management
description: Designed for students who intend to pursue a career in food and beverage management. Course work deals specifically with the management of beverage operations. Topics for discussion include tracking beverage trends; risk-liability management; staff training and responsible customer service; wine and spirits list development; beverage pricing; food and wine pairings; the beverage industry structure and beverage alcohol regulations; purchasing, storage, and service; major beverage categories; cost controls and loss prevention; and creative beverage merchandising.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 4300.

class: HADM 4380
class title: Culture and Cuisine
description: This course will provide an overview of the factors that contribute to the development and evolution of food culture and behavior around the world. The class will use an inter-disciplinary approach using in-class discussion and kitchen production informed by readings and research across anthropology, geography, history, sociology, and psychology to examine how factors combine to create a food culture, its cuisine, and how both impact the human experience.
distribution categories: (ALC-HA, GLC-HA)

class: HADM 4410
class title: Strategic Management
description: Strategic management integrates all of student's previous courses, including marketing, finance, accounting, operations, etc., and introduces them to new strategic management concepts. The course examines the total enterprise, the industry, and the competitive environment in which it operates. The goal is to develop a mastery of the analytical tools to perform analyses of the industry and competitors. The course focuses on how firms formulate, implement, and evaluate strategies. Using a case-based approach, the course emphasizes critical thinking and decision making to maintain competitive advantage in a hypercompetitive and maturing industry.
outcome: Students will identify key issues and appropriately apply discipline principles to analyze a hospitality management solution., Students will create professional-quality written business documents., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., Students will demonstrate productive team behaviors., Students will identify the ethical dimensions of a business decision., Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., Students will describe their personal strengths and development needs related to hospitality management., Students will identify the personal goals and learning opportunities required for continued personal and professional development., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one of the following courses: HADM 2021, HADM 2211, HADM 2430, HADM 2560, HADM 2810, HADM 3650, and HADM 2351 or HADM 3350.

class: HADM 4470
class title: Managing Hospitality Distribution
description: In this course, we frame the issue of channel distribution, and look at recent trends. Costs and benefits of each distribution channel are evaluated, and channels are studied in the context of the segments and types of customers they deliver to hotels. We use a 'channel x segment' framework to study the impact of distribution approaches, and we consider source markets as well. We examine 'preference' and the associated payments to achieve that. Metrics and analysis approaches play a significant role in distribution, and that is reflected throughout this course. Issues such as the Billboard Effect and Onward Distribution are examined. We will study 'bias-direct' strategies that hotels have implemented, and take a 'Game Theory' approach to analyzing such decisions. Group and individual projects give the opportunity to apply what we learn to real-world scenarios.   
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1410 and HADM 2430.

class: HADM 4510
class title: Restaurant Development
description: Students are exposed to the process, challenges, and rewards of developing a restaurant concept from the idea to the construction of the first unit. The course includes readings, discussions with industry leaders, and cases. It culminates with students formulating a detailed restaurant concept and development plan.

class: HADM 4515
class title: Hospitality Visioning and Concept Design
description: This course is an interdisciplinary course where one can apply what they have learned in hospitality development &amp; design, marketing, real estate and operations, to envision a hotel concept, or brand story, and fully develop it with a team to understand how this concept informs site selection, program, design, and operational procedures.
outcome: Foster an in-depth understanding of the hotel real estate development process with an emphasis on the "Concept Phase" and how decisions in the front-end impact future phases in the process., Understand how branding, design and operations inform each other to deliver a seamless experience for the guest., Understand the sequential nature of the development of a hospitality brand and learn how to apply a brand vision as a filter for all decisions throughout the development process., Understand the role of each professional in the development of a new hotel concept including developer, architect/designer, marketing/branding professional, and operator., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2550 or HADM 2560.

class: HADM 4760
class title: Visual Basic for Applications: End-User Programming
description: This is an introductory programming course for end-users (e.g., business managers and consultants). Students develop fluency in the popular Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) language. Using VBA, students learn how to customize and extend the Microsoft Office Suite, with an emphasis on Excel. They also develop custom information systems using Microsoft Office applications as programmable building blocks. Secondary objectives of the course are to cover fundamental design and programming principles. The course is entirely lab-based.

class: HADM 4770
class title: Advanced Business Modeling
description: This course is taught in a 'flipped' environment. It focuses on organizational systems, planning, and the decision process and how information is used for decision support in organizations. Students are provided with practical skills in developing spreadsheet computer models using Microsoft Excel. Topics include business planning and forecasting, numerical methods, advanced formulas and functions, user-interface design, data protection and validation, importing external data, and output presentation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1740, HADM 2740, AEM 2010, FSAD 2880, or ILRID 2660. 

class: HADM 4815
class title: Digital Platforms
description: Platforms have become central to many of society's most important functions. You use them to find information (Google, Bing, etc.), communicate with friends (iOS, WhatsApp), find a date (Tinder, Bumble), book a flight (Google Flights), make hotel (Kayak) or restaurant reservations (OpenTable). There is a good chance you are reading this course description on a digital platform (OS X, Linux, or Windows). This seminar provides a multidisciplinary lens by which to study these organizations as the intersection of markets, technology, and institutions. The sessions will discuss how platforms have transformed labor, democracy, economics, law, and other aspects of social life. In doing so, this seminar will allow students to engage in discussions about surveillance, capitalism, inequality, power, and cooperation.
outcome: Students will be able to understand digital platforms from multiple academic disciplinary perspectives., Students will be able to explain how digital platforms are reshaping the concept of labor and work., Students will be able to understand how platform organizations wield power, especially in relation to consumers and the state., Students will be able to possess a foundational understanding of how to create, compete with, or co-exist with platform organizations., 
distribution categories: (SSC-HA)

class: HADM 4870
class title: Real Estate Law
description: This course provides students with an understanding of the legal issues surrounding the ownership, transfer, and use and development of real estate. Students will learn to recognize and evaluate legal issues in order to inform the decision-making process with respect to real estate, whether as a business executive, an entrepreneur, or in personal life.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: HADM 3870.

class: HADM 4890
class title: The Law of the Internet and E-Commerce
description: The computer industry and the Internet have fundamentally changed the world in swift, dramatic fashion. The emergence of global digital networks and digital technologies offer to nearly anyone the ability to access, store, mine, manipulate, and transmit vast amounts of information. At the same time, this revolution in the use of information raises new and often complex legal disputes in areas such as copyright, trademark, privacy, speech, contract formation, jurisdiction, information security, etc. Moreover, the rapidly growing maze of laws directed at the Internet is another thorny obstacle for persons and companies doing business on the web. The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the legal topics and principles applicable to the Internet, and to help students identify and understand the rapid developments of the law of the Internet by exploring specific problems.

class: HADM 4910
class title: Hotel Ezra Cornell (H.E.C.)
description: For 100 years, Hotel Ezra Cornell has been an essential part of the Cornell Nolan School of Hotel Administration, allowing students the opportunity to put theory into practice while taking on the leadership responsibility for this student-run hospitality showcase.  Through participation on the Board of Directors, students practice the complexities of leading and managing individuals, teams and the organization as well as growing their leadership skills through experiential learning. Critical course outcomes include applying fundamental business principles to plan, organize, staff, direct, and financially control the weekend-long HEC conference; leading a diverse team of students and volunteers through understanding individual differences, leveraging conflict management and applying team-based problem-solving techniques; preparing and presenting professional-quality written and oral communications; and critically assessing personal strengths and development needs through the experiential learning process. Board members receive credit for their participation in HEC: Students earn 3 credits toward HADM electives. Any additional credits will be applied to free electives. Students interested in running for board positions in the spring must be in good academic standing with a minimum GPA of 2.5. Eligibility requirements for specific board positions can be obtained from the HEC Office (G75 Statler Hall) and will be distributed to the student body after the previous years' conference. Students interested in a board position are encouraged to discuss their intentions with the HEC course instructor
outcome: Students will apply fundamental business principles to analyze situations within a diverse hospitality management context., Students will create professional-quality written business documents from a management perspective., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation within the context of a diverse hospitality organization., Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team., Students will describe their personal strengths and development needs, and identify opportunities to further enhance relevant knowledge and skills., 

class: HADM 4980
class title: Special Studies Project II
description: Students have the option of conducting a special studies project in any academic area of the School of Hotel Administration. Projects are conducted under the direction of a SHA faculty member, and regular, frequent consultations are mandatory.

class: HADM 4990
class title: Special Studies Project I
description: Students have the option of conducting a special studies project in any academic area of the School of Hotel Administration. Projects are conducted under the direction of a SHA faculty member, and regular, frequent consultations are mandatory.

class: HADM 5120
class title: Experiential Networking I
description: In this interactive course, students will learn the different types and ways to network, how to create their own personal branding statement, best practices on how to reach out to someone you have not met before, ways to master the basics of video communications, and how to share and utilize their networks. This course expands student life and networking skills to add value and grow their knowledge, interpersonal/people skills, and experience to succeed in business and life.
outcome: Students will begin to understand what networking is, identify and explain different networking styles and techniques, and identify their own style., Students will start to discuss and analyze best practices, be aware of their natural style and ways they can enhance their style or leverage their natural strength and adopt characteristics of different styles., Students will start to identify their core strengths and understand why these matters, home in on what they love and want to do, differentiate themselves by tying their strengths to results, and use persuasive communication techniques to start creating a powerful and compelling personal positioning statement., Students will be able to build specific action items, have more confidence and insights into how to reach out and network on various platforms, gauge the right timing for follow-up, and understand ways to execute their plan., Students should be able to use best practices while using technology (video, audio, internet connection), including ensuring they have a proper background, are prepared for discussion, and present themselves properly to build relationships regardless of the medium., Students will be able to understand who their current network connections are, how to utilize those connections to build and strengthen relationships as well as expand their networks and share them with others., 

class: HADM 5360
class title: Beverage Management
description: Designed for students who intend to pursue a career in food and beverage management. Course work deals specifically with the management of beverage operations. Topics for discussion include tracking beverage trends; risk-liability management; staff training and responsible customer service; wine and spirits list development; beverage pricing; food and wine pairings; the beverage industry structure and beverage alcohol regulations; purchasing, storage, and service; major beverage categories; cost controls and loss prevention; and creative beverage merchandising.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 4300.

class: HADM 5510
class title: Restaurant Development
description: Students are exposed to the process, challenges, and rewards of developing a restaurant concept from the idea to the construction of the first unit. The course includes readings, discussions with industry leaders, and cases. It culminates with students formulating a detailed restaurant concept and development plan.

class: HADM 5760
class title: Visual Basic for Applications: End-User Programming
description: This is an introductory programming course for end-users (e.g., business managers and consultants). Students develop fluency in the popular Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) language. Using VBA, students learn how to customize and extend the Microsoft Office Suite, with an emphasis on Excel. They also develop custom information systems using Microsoft Office applications as programmable building blocks. Secondary objectives of the course are to cover fundamental design and programming principles. The course is entirely lab-based.

class: HADM 5890
class title: The Law of the Internet and E-Commerce
description: The computer industry and the Internet have fundamentally changed the world in swift, dramatic fashion. The emergence of global digital networks and digital technologies offer to nearly anyone the ability to access, store, mine, manipulate, and transmit vast amounts of information. At the same time, this revolution in the use of information raises new and often complex legal disputes in areas such as copyright, trademark, privacy, speech, contract formation, jurisdiction, information security, etc. Moreover, the rapidly growing maze of laws directed at the Internet is another thorny obstacle for persons and companies doing business on the web. The purpose of this course is to acquaint students with the legal topics and principles applicable to the Internet, and to help students identify and understand the rapid developments of the law of the Internet by exploring specific problems.

class: HADM 6033
class title: Introduction to Senior Living and Related Programs
description: With the aging population, longer life expectancies and the population bulge of the baby boomers, serving both the hospitality and housing/care needs of seniors will be a tremendous growth area. The facilities and programs to serve these populations have certain specialized aspects related to healthcare, but they also share a number of the operating characteristics of many hospitality and real estate operations and design.
outcome: Identify and categorize a number of facility issues and special attributes on the design and operations of senior housing, assisted living and CCRCs., Write a brief description of some unique aspects of branding, marketing and sales approaches to senior housing and assisted living properties., Explain some current or potential future trends and innovations and to be able to identify at least one potential entrepreneurial opportunity in the field., Describe different financing options available to developers of senior living facilities and distinguish some of the advantages and disadvantages between them., Identify opportunities to apply hospitality approaches to healthcare settings whether it be senior living or related areas., 

class: HADM 6051
class title: Revenue Management
description: Revenue Management (RM), sometimes referred to as Dynamic Pricing, are methods for profitably managing hotel capacity. The intent of this course is to teach you how to effectively implement RM techniques. Emphasis will be placed on the integration among techniques, information technology, and to expose you to RM the travel market. While the course focuses on implementation of hotel RM, other application areas in travel and retail will be discussed. In addition, you will be expected to express technical revenue management terms in clear, managerial language.
outcome: Students will learn how to effectively implement RM techniques., 

class: HADM 6065
class title: Industry Immersion I
description: This set of two, two-day immersion seminars is co-taught by industry leaders and Cornell faculty in New York City. Participants will participate in this during their New York residency in year one and two. Students will solve problems based on real-life scenarios and present their solutions to industry leaders and the Hotel School faculty members who accompany them. Students will have readings and case materials assigned from business periodicals, the hospitality industry press, and selected textbooks to read to prepare for the site visits and the coursework. Students will be directly exposed to industry-specific operational and strategic elements through site visits, presentations from company executives and directed case study.  Leadership Immersion I and Leadership Immersion II will cover different topics, use different companies and different industry leaders each year.
outcome: Leadership, that is, how does the company structure their leadership team, what are the core beliefs and guiding principles., Operations management and logistics, that is, how is work structured, what analytics are key to managing the businesses., Strategic planning, that is, what are the key elements that drive decision making and the execution of operational processes in the organization., Financial management, that is, what are the key metrics used to gauge financial performance and how are they measured, managed, and disseminated., Customer service management, that is, what are the key guiding principles behind the service delivery in the organizations for guests, employees, and managers and what is the service culture in place to drive service-focused behavior; (6) Product development and enhancement, that is, what are the key innovation factors that are in play that drive organizational growth and stabilization., 

class: HADM 6066
class title: Industry Immersion II
description: This set of two, two-day immersion seminars is co-taught by industry leaders and Cornell faculty in New York City. Participants will participate in this during their New York residency in year one and two. Students will solve problems based on real-life scenarios and present their solutions to industry leaders and the Hotel School faculty members who accompany them. Students will have readings and case materials assigned from business periodicals, the hospitality industry press, and selected textbooks to read to prepare for the site visits and the coursework. Students will be directly exposed to industry-specific operational and strategic elements through site visits, presentations from company executives and directed case study.  Leadership Immersion I and Leadership Immersion II will cover different topics, use different companies and different industry leaders each year.
outcome: Leadership, that is, how does the company structure their leadership team, what are the core beliefs and guiding principles., Operations management and logistics, that is, how is work structured, what analytics are key to managing the businesses., Strategic planning, that is, what are the key elements that drive decision making and the execution of operational processes in the organization., Financial management, that is, what are the key metrics used to gauge financial performance and how are they measured, managed, and disseminated., Customer service management, that is, what are the key guiding principles behind the service delivery in the organizations for guests, employees, and managers and what is the service culture in place to drive service-focused behavior; (6) Product development and enhancement, that is, what are the key innovation factors that are in play that drive organizational growth and stabilization., 

class: HADM 6070
class title: Hospitality Operations and Consulting
description: This course focuses on advanced, operations-related, analytical tools that can be applied in hospitality operations. These tools are best suited to either people working as internal consultants (i.e., analysts) or external consultants (for consulting firms). There are two main focuses: (1) benchmarking and best practice analysis; and (2) service processes. This course also examines the practices of firms offering hospitality operations consulting.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: HADM 7030.

class: HADM 6100
class title: MMH Distinguished Lectures (DDLS)
description: HADM 6100 is a required master's-level course that provides a unique opportunity for successful industry leaders to share their experiences with M.M.H. students in a small group setting. Speakers will share their views about the successful skill sets, temperaments, and leadership styles needed to be an effective and valuable executive. They will also focus on critical industry-related issues. The speakers are chosen for their knowledge, experience, and proven success in the hospitality industry. Students in HADM 6100 have an unparalleled opportunity to learn how hospitality executives view the current and future status of the industry.

class: HADM 6101
class title: The Economics of Urban Real Estate Markets and the Built Environment
description: This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of the economics of urban real estate markets and the built environment. This will include links between market drivers of property use and value, durability of buildings and infrastructure, finance, and social policy. The course begins with analysis of the 2007 housing market crash and the financial crisis it precipitated. Spatial patterns of development and real estate values are then considered, including patterns extending out from city centers, moving up high in tall commercial buildings, and differences across metropolitan areas. The course concludes with assessment of how new strategies to facilitate urban transportation along with work-from-home have potential to threaten central city office markets and affect patterns of development in cities.
outcome: Apply the tools of supply and demand to explain spatial patterns of land use and value., Explain drivers of volatility in real estate markets and assess the potential for mispricing., Explain why cities typically have expensive housing and commercial space., Assess how different strategies to facilitate urban travel along with work-from-home may affect office markets and patterns of development in cities., 

class: HADM 6111
class title: Negotiations
description: This course is designed to enhance your ability to negotiate effectively in a wide variety of settings.  The course is relevant to the broad spectrum of negotiation problems that are faced by hospitality managers and professionals.  Thus, the content applies for students interested in general management, department management, corporate management, marketing, finance, real estate, consulting, and mergers and acquisitions. Each week students will be expected to negotiate a case via zoom with one of their classmates, and class sessions will focus on debriefing negotiated deals and drawing lessons from them.  Topics include: Haggling Terminology and Tactics, Integrative Bargaining &amp; Problem-solving, Balancing Integrative Bargaining with Distributive Bargaining, Additional Modes of Integration,  Planning &amp; Documentation and Negotiation Ethics.
outcome: Students will learn to develop their own personal negotiating style and skills., 

class: HADM 6112
class title: Leadership and Corporate Accountability
description: This course focuses on leader development. Through the lens of positive organizational scholarship and by engaging with case studies, group activities, self-reflection, and peer discussion, students will a) deepen self-awareness about their leadership style and strengths, b) learn how to unlock critical intrapersonal and interpersonal resources, and c) develop positive leadership skills and practices. Regarding accountability, students will leverage the Giving Voice to Values framework to learn about how to align their professional lives with their principles and practice effectively standing up for their values.
outcome: Students will learn to develop their own personal negotiating style and skills., 

class: HADM 6130
class title: Entrepreneurial Management
description: This course addresses the issues faced by managers who wish to take a nascent idea and turn it into a viable organization that creates value, and empowers students to develop their own approaches, guidelines, and skills for being entrepreneurial managers.

class: HADM 6135
class title: Conversations with Entrepreneurs
description: This course will guide students to answer the fundamental question: "Why Entrepreneurialism? Is it the right path for me?". Many people say they want to start a business but don't expect and desire the authority and responsibility that comes with it. The objective of this course is to both broaden students' thinking about what constitutes the field of entrepreneurial endeavor – and to sharpen their focus on the unique attributes they bring to the table in considering launching entrepreneurial ventures of their own in the future.

class: HADM 6140
class title: Innovation and Corporate Renewal
description: Innovation is increasingly the source of sustainable competitive advantage for firms around the world. However, building an organization to successfully and repeatedly bring innovations to market has proven to be a challenge for many companies. This course explores the practices and processes that managers use to manage innovation effectively. This course also explores four aspects of innovation: exploring, executing, leveraging and renewing innovation. 

class: HADM 6144
class title: Developing an Entrepreneurial Mindset
description: Opportunity recognition is the very basis from which entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial activity begins. Research shows that opportunity recognition is a learned behavior and as such this course will also seek to provide students with a better understanding of opportunity recognition through an exploration of the skills, tools, and mindset to generate new business ideas. Heavy emphasis on market validation and value proposition design throughout the course.

class: HADM 6200
class title: Principles of Real Estate
description: This introduction to real estate finance and investment emphasizes developing valuation and decision-making skills. It introduces students to the business of real estate, both residential and commercial real estate, including roles, activities and players, terminology, and how the tools, concepts, and models in real estate are used in decision making. The objectives of this course are twofold: (1) to help students develop an understanding of real estate fundamentals; and (2) to introduce students to the quantitative aspects of real estate-investment decision making, valuation under uncertainty, and mortgage financing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: an undergraduate or graduate level course in finance.

class: HADM 6205
class title: Real Estate Financial Modeling
description: This course covers the basic financial models and frameworks used throughout the real estate industry today. In this introductory course, students will focus exclusively on a rigorous cash flow construction and scenario analysis to include the impact of deterministic inputs in ex-ante decision making. The course covers extensively the modeling of simple lease structures (for different property types), conventional and exotic debt instruments and simple equity waterfalls.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2221, HADM 3210, HADM 4200, HADM 6200, or REAL 6200.

class: HADM 6210
class title: Hospitality Real Estate Finance
description: Focuses on real estate financing for hospitality-oriented projects. The following topics are addressed: methods of measuring rates of return; feasibility and appraisal processes; equity and debt financing vehicles to include joint ventures, limited partnerships, construction mortgages, participating, convertible and seller-financed mortgages; forms of operating agreements to include management contracts, leases, and franchises; and trends in international hotel franchising. Presentation of hospitality industry real estate practitioners will tie course material to current industry practices.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 6200 or REAL 6200.

class: HADM 6250
class title: Securitization and Structured Financial Products
description: Deals with the structure and analysis of securitized financial products with an emphasis on residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS). The course is intended for those who wish to acquire a working knowledge of the analysis of such securities (e.g., collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial MBS, auto loans, and credit card-backed securities) and an understanding of the securitization process. The course's subject matter necessitates a highly analytic and quantitative approach, and students are required to have a strong background in finance and economics. Students who have questions about preparation or background should see the instructor.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 3210, or HADM 4200, or HADM 6200 or permission of instructor.

class: HADM 6265
class title: Mastering Strategy Execution: Control Systems to Win
description: This course gives you the tools to execute a winning strategy. Once strategy is defined, managers must allocate scarce resources among units and hold people accountable for those resources. Managers must use performance measurement and control systems to direct and motivate desired behaviors and monitor progress against the previously defined strategy.
outcome: How to design an effective organization to win in the current competitive environment., How to identify the organization's primary customer., How the process of resource allocation among organizational units., How to design core values to provide guidance for decision making throughout the organization., How to develop and implement systems to measure and monitor organizational performance., 

class: HADM 6310
class title: Environmental, Social and Governance Strategy in the Food and Beverage Industry
description: Through carefully selected readings, insightful case studies, and engaging discussions with industry experts, this course delves into the strategic challenges faced by food and beverage firms within the Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) framework. Through critical analysis of real-world cases, students gain a deeper understanding of leadership and development strategies relevant to the food and beverage industry and its role in shaping a sustainable global food system, with a strong focus on integrating ESG principles.

class: HADM 6380
class title: Culture and Cuisine
description: This course will provide an overview of the factors that contribute to the development and evolution of food culture and behavior around the world. The class will use an inter-disciplinary approach using in-class discussion and kitchen production informed by readings and research across anthropology, geography, history, sociology, and psychology to examine how factors combine to create a food culture, its cuisine, and how both impact the human experience.

class: HADM 6491
class title: Integrated Marketing Communications for the Hospitality Industry
description: This course delves into the dynamic field of marketing promotion in the hospitality industry. Building on theories and research from brand management, communications, consumer learning and information processing, and persuasion and attitude change, students will examine traditional promotions tools such as broadcast advertising, public relations, and direct marketing, as well as new digital media tools such as search and website marketing, content marketing, social media, influencer marketing, experiential marketing, digital-direct, and programmatic advertising. Students will demonstrate their emerging knowledge through quizzes and learning activities focused on the theories that guide marketing-communications strategy and practice, as well as the development of an integrated marketing communications plan for a hypothetical hotel company.
outcome: Possess knowledge of the core marketing-promotion approaches and their interaction with the brand and buyer depending on marketing objectives., Understand the key elements of persuasion that are used to influence consumers and how consumers learn from and make sense of marketing persuasion., Critically analyze IMC strategy and execution., Create IMC programs with results that are measurable., Select the appropriate media and messages for given communication objectives., Evaluate the effectiveness of emerging media in achieving marketing objectives., Identify ethical issues in marketing communications and how to make principled, responsible decisions for effective marketing within the global business environment., 

class: HADM 6515
class title: Hospitality Visioning and Concept Design
description: This course is an interdisciplinary course where one can apply what they have learned in hospitality development &amp; design, marketing, real estate and operations, to envision a hotel concept, or brand story, and fully develop it with a team to understand how this concept informs site selection, program, design, and operational procedures.
outcome: Foster an in-depth understanding of the hotel real estate development process with an emphasis on the "Concept Phase" and how decisions in the front-end impact future phases in the process., Understand how branding, design and operations inform each other to deliver a seamless experience for the guest., Understand the sequential nature of the development of a hospitality brand and learn how to apply a brand vision as a filter for all decisions throughout the development process., Understand the role of each professional in the development of a new hotel concept including developer, architect/designer, marketing/branding professional, and operator., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 7510.

class: HADM 6520
class title: Hospitality Asset Management
description: Hotel asset managers act on behalf of investors to meet the specific objectives of real estate ownership. Specifically in this course, the focus is on hotel and resort real estate assets. This course provides an overview of the strategies and tactics of real estate asset management and provides insights into the current market and operational challenges. Students will walk through the components of the asset management strategic plan to understand how different analyses influence the sell/hold, brand and operational decisions. Other topics include hotel management agreements, the capital investment decision, and the asset manager's interaction with portfolio managers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 3210, HADM 4200 or HADM 6200.

class: HADM 6521
class title: Hospitality Asset Management I: Strategic and Tactical Processes
description: Real estate asset managers act on behalf of the owners of real estate investments to meet the owners' specific objectives. We analyze the asset manager's role in building value at both the portfolio and property levels. Lectures, assignments, cases, and guest speakers introduce the latest techniques in asset management and provide insights into current market and operational challenges. Topics include real estate portfolio management, the asset management strategic process, hotel management contracts, and "owner vs. manager" dynamics.
outcome: Students will learn how to analyze asset manager's roles in building value at both the portfolio and property levels., 

class: HADM 6522
class title: Hospitality Asset Management II: Financial Management and Capital Investment Strategies
description: Real estate asset managers are charged with maximizing the value of each asset they manage on behalf of the real estate owner. In this course, lectures, assignments, cases, and guest speakers introduce the latest tools, trends, and strategies in managing and monitoring the asset during the hold period. The goals of these strategies are to enhance value for ownership through utilizing financial management tools and employing strategic allocation of capital within the asset. Topics include sell vs. hold decisions, benchmarking property performance, variance analyses, physical asset preservation, and the capital investment decision.
outcome: Students will learn the latest trends, and strategies in managing and monitoring assets., Students will learn how to enhance value for ownership through utilizing financial management tools., 

class: HADM 6610
class title: Communication for Entrepreneurs
description: Communication skills are essential for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs face unique communication challenges when communicating with initial investors, business partners, founding employees, first customers, and the media. Students will apply course concepts to their own ideas while developing communication competencies in a variety of entrepreneurial communication contexts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1650 or equivalent, for undergraduate students only.

class: HADM 6710
class title: Python Programming
description: Introduction to programming in Python with an emphasis on Hospitality applications. No previous programming experience is required. Topics covered include programming basics, file input and output, Excel integration, database integration, and data analysis.
outcome: Basic proficiency in programming., Basic proficiency in Python programming., The ability to create Python programs that can read from and write to files., The ability to create Python programs that integrate closely with Excel®., The ability to create Python programs that integrate closely with databases., The ability to create Python programs for analyzing data., 

class: HADM 6770
class title: Advanced Business Modeling
description: This class is taught in a 'flipped' environment. It focuses on organizational systems, planning, and the decision process and how information is used for decision support in organizations. Students are provided with practical skills in developing spreadsheet computer models using Microsoft Excel. Topics include: business planning and forecasting, numerical methods, advanced formulas and functions, user-interface design, data protection and validation, importing external data, and output presentation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 1740 or equivalent if approved by the instructor.

class: HADM 6815
class title: Digital Platforms
description: Platforms have become central to many of society's most important functions. You use them to find information (Google, Bing, etc.), communicate with friends (iOS, WhatsApp), find a date (Tinder, Bumble), book a flight (Google Flights), make hotel (Kayak) or restaurant reservations (OpenTable). There is a good chance you are reading this course description on a digital platform (OS X, Linux, or Windows). This seminar provides a multidisciplinary lens by which to study these organizations as the intersection of markets, technology, and institutions. The sessions will discuss how platforms have transformed labor, democracy, economics, law, and other aspects of social life. In doing so, this seminar will allow students to engage in discussions about surveillance, capitalism, inequality, power, and cooperation.
outcome: Students will be able to understand digital platforms from multiple academic disciplinary perspectives., Students will be able to explain how digital platforms are reshaping the concept of labor and work., Students will be able to understand how platform organizations wield power, especially in relation to consumers and the state., Students will be able to possess a foundational understanding of how to create, compete with, or co-exist with platform organizations., 

class: HADM 6870
class title: Real Estate Law
description: This course provides students with an understanding of the legal issues surrounding the ownership, transfer, and use and development of real estate. Students will learn to recognize and evaluate legal issues in order to inform the decision-making process with respect to real estate, whether as a business executive, an entrepreneur, or in personal life.

class: HADM 6911
class title: Hospitality Immersion II
description: This second hospitality immersion provides an opportunity for students to connect with industry leaders with a focus upon innovation. The course connects students with leaders that are driving change and innovation within hospitality and prepares them with innovation focussed content that allows students to connect their coursework to challeging issues facing their comapnies and the industry as a whole.
outcome: Students to connect with industry leaders with a focus upon innovation., 

class: HADM 6980
class title: Graduate Special Studies Project II
description: Each student must have in mind a project and obtain agreement from an individual faculty member to oversee and direct the study. Written permission is required before course enrollment. Permission forms are available in the Office of Student Services, 180 Statler Hall.

class: HADM 6990
class title: Graduate Special Studies Project I
description: Each student must have in mind a project and obtain agreement from an individual faculty member to oversee and direct the study. Written permission is required before course enrollment. Permission forms are available in the Office of Student Services, 180 Statler Hall.

class: HADM 7030
class title: Operations Management
description: The purpose of this course is to introduce "world-class" service operations management concepts and approaches for the hospitality industry. This core course focuses on understanding levers for structuring, managing, and improving a firm's recurring business processes to achieve a competitive advantage in customer responsiveness, price, quality, and variety of products and services in the hospitality industry.
Processes within firms, as well as between firms, i.e. supply chains, are explored. The fundamental principles underlying state-of-the-art practices are explored so that students learn to critically evaluate these and other operational improvement programs, as well as develop their own operational improvements.
Students learn how to manage and improve the operations of a firm, and how operational issues affect and are affected by the many business decisions they will be called upon to make or recommend in their careers.
As such, this course is essential to the participants working/aspiring to work in hospitality consulting, entrepreneurs, or general managers. Working knowledge of operations is also indispensable to those working/aspiring to work in marketing, finance, and accounting, where the interface between these functions and operations is critical. Finally, an understanding of how firms become market leaders through operations is important in investment careers.
 
outcome: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and formulate a solution based on principles from a least two management disciplines., Students will analyze a management situation within a global hospitality context and defend a course of action., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team based on their analysis of team needs., Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., Students will demonstrate in-depth expertise in a self-selected area of the hospitality industry., 

class: HADM 7144
class title: Competitive Strategies for the Hospitality Industry
description: Examines competitive strategies, cooperative strategies, and growth strategies within the hospitality industries and beyond. The goal is to develop a mastery of the strategic issues facing hospitality as well as important new qualitative tools to perform analyses. Using a case-based approach, the course focuses not only on hospitality but on other industries as well, allowing for thinking "outside the box" and development of novel solutions not possible by studying only hospitality. The course integrates knowledge from all previous M.M.H. courses including marketing, finance, organizational behavior, and human resources.

class: HADM 7230
class title: Corporate Finance
description: The course will provide students with a broad understanding of managerial finance. The overall objective is to develop skills in using accounting and cash flow information for financial planning, capital budgeting evaluation, long-term financial decision-making, and capital structure decisions. Topics will include valuation of investments, capital budgeting decisions, capital structure, long-term financing, cost of capital, debt capacity, and raising capital in the public markets.
outcome: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and formulate a solution based on principles from a least two management disciplines., Students will analyze a management situation within a global hospitality context and defend a course of action., Students will create professional-quality written business documents., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team based on their analysis of team needs., Students will recognized and distinguish the ethical dimensions of a business decision., Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., 

class: HADM 7273
class title: Leadership and Ethics
description: This course is designed to offer descriptive and prescriptive knowledge about management, leadership, and ethics in organizations. Selected issues, themes, cases, readings, and exercises will be relevant and applicable to working in the hospitality industry. Together, both courses will give students more insight into the following:

class: HADM 7410
class title: Hospitality Strategic Management
description: This course provides an opportunity for students to connect content across other courses (marketing, operations, finance, accounting, etc...) through a lens of innovation as students focus on outlining solutions to key challenges either within organizations where they currently work, or develop new concepts for firms to tackle key issues facing consumers today.
outcome: Students focus on outlining solutions to key challenges either within organizations where they currently work or develop new concepts for firms to tackle key issues facing consumers today., 

class: HADM 7430
class title: Marketing Management for Services
description: Marketing links the company to its customers. Marketing listens to the voice of the customer to guide product innovation, pricing strategies, and distribution approaches. Marketing communicates the company's value offer and shapes consumer attitudes toward the brand. Marketing facilitates the consumer purchase process, monitors satisfaction, and helps to ensure a stream of customers and profits. Thus, even if you don't pursue a career in marketing, it is important for you to understand how marketing works to integrate the activities of the firm.
Services dominate the world economy. Services are different from manufactured goods in terms of how each is produced, purchased, and perceived. As such, services require a distinctive approach to marketing, both in creation and execution. Most business school marketing courses focus on the manufacturing sector. In this class, you will be exposed to a way of thinking about marketing that is grounded by a service-dominant paradigm. You will learn analytical approaches and gain insights needed to develop and implement service strategies. You will learn how to study consumer behavior for services and examine frameworks for service experience design and management. You will learn to create and map service processes, assess and deliver service quality, and diagnose and enhance service branding and marketing-communications strategies.
outcome: Students will analyze a management situation within a global hospitality context and defend a course of action., 

class: HADM 7510
class title: Properties Development and Planning
description: This course serves as an overview of hospitality project development and planning from the perspective of an owner and manager. Students learn about the role of the development team, feasibility studies, space programming, construction and renovation management, and functional and design criteria for hotels and restaurants. Teams will prepare program documentation for a new lodging property or concept.
outcome: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and formulate a solution based on principles from a least two management disciplines., Students will analyze a management situation within a global hospitality context and defend a course of action., Students will create professional-quality written business documents., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team based on their analysis of team needs., Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., Students will demonstrate in-depth expertise in a self-selected area of the hospitality industry., 

class: HADM 7610
class title: Management Communication
description: Organizational leaders in the hospitality industry depend on written, visual, and oral messages to solve problems and to accomplish professional goals within the workplace. Students learn to think critically, ethically, and strategically about communication in a variety of contexts and for a variety of purposes, for example, proposing an idea and addressing real ethical challenges that may occur in a crisis situation. Students will practice communication principles, such as developing and supporting an argument and crafting clear, concise messages." 
outcome: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., Students will plan and deliver a professional-quality oral presentation., Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team based on their analysis of team needs., Students will recognize and distinguish the ethical dimensions of a business decision., Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., 

class: HADM 7820
class title: Human Resources Management
description: This graduate-level course covers the strategies that enable companies to attract, develop, and retain high-quality employees, which include selection, compensation, performance appraisal, and career management. In each of these areas, the focus is on the return on the human-resource investment.
outcome: PLO 1.1: Students will critically evaluate a hospitality management problem and formulate a solution based on principles from a least two management disciplines., PLO 1.2: Students will analyze a management situation within a global hospitality context and defend a course of action., PLO 2.1: Students will create professional-quality written business documents., PLO 2.3: Students will demonstrate effective behaviors within a diverse team based on their analysis of team needs., PLO 3.1: Students will recognized and distinguish the ethical dimensions of a business decision., PLO 3.2: Students will evaluate the ethical consequences of their business decisions on various stakeholders., 

class: HADM 7900
class title: Cornell-Peking MMH/MBA Dual-Degree Program

class: HADM 8900
class title: M.S. Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for master's students.

class: HADM 9330
class title: Revenue Management Analytics
description: This course will focus on algorithmic approaches to setting prices for perishable products such as hotel rooms, airline seats, taxi-rides available in a neighborhood, seasonal products, etc. Topics covered will include revenue management for single resource, for networks of resources, overbooking, choice modeling, revenue management for differentiated products, assortment planning, online learning and pricing, and competitive assortment and price optimization. We will also see recent advances in the field, such as using game theory to model strategic consumer behavior in revenue management settings, applying revenue management techniques to platform settings, and empirical studies in revenue management.

class: HADM 9900
class title: Ph.D. Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. candidates.

class: HADM 9981
class title: Seminar in Service Management Research
description: This seminar course is designed for PhD and M.S. graduate research students with an interest in service and hospitality research. Topics will cover a range of domains relevant to hospitality scholarship, including service operations, revenue management, human resources management, services marketing, consumer behavior, communication, and real estate. We will also explore the research process and research methodologies, especially as these relate to applied scholarship. A highlight of the course is the participation of Graduate Faculty from the Hotel School who will share their research and stimulate your thinking about research questions of importance to the discipline of hospitality.

class: HD 1102
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE) (KCM-AG)

class: HD 1125
class title: FWS: Topics in Human Development
description: This is a topics course for Human Development First-Year Writing Seminars.
outcome: Learn about Human Development concepts., Write about Human Development., 
distribution categories: (LAD-HE) (WRT-AG)

class: HD 1130
class title: Introduction to Human Development
description: Introduction to Human Development provides a broad and foundational overview of field of human development, starting from conception and ending through process of death and dying. The course will start with an outline and explanation of the lifespan perspective in human development. The biological beginnings of life and prenatal development will serve as the start of the discussion of human development, followed by an exploration of physical, cognitive, and socioemotional development at each subsequent stage within the lifespan (e.g., infancy, early childhood, middle &amp; late childhood, etc.). Discussion of each developmental stage will highlight major research findings and their real-world application.
outcome: Develop a broad but strong base of knowledge surrounding the field of human development and how human development research is conducted., Be able to read and understand, critically think about current research in the field of human development and how research can be applied to the real world., Gain an understanding about the different developmental stages and what kind of change is occurring across the domains of physical, cognitive, and socioemotional development., Consider your beliefs about development before the course and reconsider the beliefs that are not supported by research., Find this class fun and interesting, taking what you learned from the course and be able to apply it in your daily life., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: HD 2150
class title: Introduction to Human Development: Infancy and Childhood
description: HD 2150 introduces students to the major theoretical perspectives, methods (both classic and contemporary), research findings, and controversies in the study of child development. Prenatal development and development in infancy and childhood are examined, including physical, cognitive, and social/emotional development.  The focus is on individual development from an interdisciplinary perspective, with an emphasis on psychological development, but also drawing from the fields of sociology, history, biology, anthropology, neuroscience, and education.  This is a second-level course, so the emphasis is on analytical, creative, and practical understanding and application of concepts of development.
outcome: Identify the major milestones of development in various domains (e.g., physical, cognitive, and social/emotional)., Comprehend and apply theoretical perspectives and research findings to understand the mechanisms by which developmental change occurs., Understand the interaction of genetic and environmental factors in development., Be able to evaluate how developmental research findings are reported in the popular press., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE) (KCM-AG)

class: HD 2180
class title: Human Development: Adulthood and Aging
description: Introduces students to theories and research in adult development and aging. Describes biological, psychological and social changes from early through late adulthood. Identifies strategies to promote healthy aging at the individual and societal level.
outcome: Describe age-related changes in different aspects of functioning from early adulthood into old age., Understand key theoretical frameworks in life-span development., Appreciate multi-disciplinary perspectives on adult development and aging., Identify open questions and new directions in the field of gerontology., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, KCM-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: HD 1130 or PSYCH 1101.

class: HD 2200
class title: The Human Brain and Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience
description: At the turn of the 21st century the age of Embodied Cognition dawned: a reconsideration of relationships between body, brain, and mind. Researchers in philosophy, psychology, linguistics, and cognitive neuroscience challenged the 20th-century dogma that the mind is like a digital computer, and can be studied independently of the body, brain, and world. Researchers turned their attention to the role that bodily experience plays in thinking and learning, and the roles neural systems for perception and action play in cognition. This course views the field of Cognitive Neuroscience through the lens of Embodied Cognition research, and evaluates the extent to which "embodiment" may be passing fad, a useful shift in perspective, or a revolutionary new way of building theories about brain and mind. 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, PBS-HE, SBA-HE) (KCM-AG)

class: HD 2230
class title: Intro to Behavioral Neuroscience
description: Introduction to psychology from a biological perspective, which focuses on brain mechanisms of behavior. Topics include the structure and function of the nervous system, physiological approaches to understanding behavior, hormones and behavior, biological bases of sensation and perception, learning and memory, cognition, emotion, and communication.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: HD 2300
class title: Cognitive Development
description: This course will provide you with an overview of how children's cognition develops. We will investigate how cognition develops from many different perspectives. The main perspectives will be biological, genetic-epistemological, socio-cultural, and information-processing ones. This course also will help you to understand how cognition influences other areas of development, including intelligence, development of the self, language, and social development. Finally, different populations will be considered to better understand the roles not only of nature and nurture, but also of how the two interact to influence development.
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 2400
class title: Introduction to Community Psychology
description: What counts as a community? How do communities shape who we are? How can we engage in action to transform the communities we are a part of? These questions guide our inquiry in this introductory community psychology course. Community psychology examines the interrelationship between individual wellbeing and the multiple social structures and contexts with which individuals interact. Community psychologists are united by a shared commitment to understanding individuals using a multidisciplinary perspective, including developmental psychology, education, and sociology. Beyond seeking to understand, community psychologists also emphasize values, applied and participatory research, and action to promote the well-being of entire communities from a strengths-based perspective. This lecture-based course will provide an overview of theory, research, and action in community psychology. We will focus on (a) essential community psychology theories, (b) methodological strategies for studying alongside communities, and (c) practical applications related to understanding social and environmental contexts as essential components of the human experience. Throughout the course, we will discuss the role of communities in shaping our understandings of diversity, equity, and social justice. 
 
outcome: Be able to explain the historical foundations of the field of community psychology., Identify the epistemologies (ways of knowing) and principles that undergird community psychology., Be able to read and critically think about current research in community psychology., Critically assess how social and environmental contexts (e.g., families, media, communities) impact individuals' development and wellness. Apply contemporary theories and research to everyday experiences and life., Begin to consider your role as a change agent in transforming societal inequity., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 2510
class title: Social Gerontology: Aging and the Life Course
description: Analyzes the social aspects of aging in contemporary American society from a life course perspective. Topics include (1) an introduction to the field of gerontology, its history, theories, and research methods; (2) a brief overview of the physiological and psychological changes that accompany aging; (3) an analysis of the contexts (e.g., family, friends, social support, employment, volunteer work) in which individual aging occurs, including differences of gender, ethnicity, and social class; and (4) the influences of society on the aging individual.
outcome: Be able to relate public health and sociological  research on health inequalities to differences in aging experiences across groups., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 1130 , SOC 1101, DSOC 1101, or PSYCH 1101.

class: HD 2580
class title: Six Pretty Good Books: Explorations in Social Science
description: This course is modeled after "Great Books" literature courses in the humanities, but with two important differences: we read non-fiction books in the social sciences rather than the humanities, written by highly prominent contemporary social scientists. The course title refers to the fact that the books are new, hence their potential greatness has yet to be confirmed by the test of time. We choose living authors to give students a unique opportunity: to interact with each of the six authors in Q&amp;A sessions via live or recorded video conferencing. 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: HD 2600
class title: Introduction to Personality
description: What is "personality"? How is it scientifically studied and measured? To what extent, do biological, social, and cultural factors shape personality? Is personality an expression of our genetic make up and biology, the culmination of social influences, the interplay of both, or the result of random events? In this course, we will review the major theoretical paradigms of personality psychology, discuss contemporary research, theory, and methodology, and learn about key historical debates in the study of "personality".
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory psychology or human development course recommended.

class: HD 2830
class title: Research Methods in Human Development
description: This course will introduce students to the basics of research design and will review several methodologies in the study of human development. The focus of the course will be on descriptive and experimental methods. Students will learn the advantages and challenges to different methodological approaches. The course also places an emphasis on developing students' scientific writing and strengthening their understanding of statistics.
outcome: The goals of the course are to encourage students to think critically, learn how to design basic research studies, and to develop their writing skills., Students will demonstrate their knowledge of course content, including theories, in areas of developmental and cognitive psychology in legal contexts., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: HD 1150.

class: HD 2930
class title: Introduction to Data Science for Social Scientists
description: Intro to Data Science for Social Scientists using R.
outcome: Import data from various sources (existing datasets, web-scraping)., Use principles of tidy data management (transposing, data types, formatting)., Manipulate data to extract needed information., Visualize quantitative data using a large variety of design principles., Run simple classifiers on data for predictive purposes., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 3110
class title: Educational Psychology
description: Educational psychology is the application of psychological principles and concepts to cases of teaching and learning. We study behavioral, cognitive, embodied, and social-cultural perspectives on learning and thinking, and we use them in planning and reflecting on weekly fieldwork outside the classroom. In the process, we become more mindful and skilled learners ourselves and better facilitators of others' learning.
outcome: Be able to analyze and improve instructional materials and methods in terms of their ... Appropriateness for a given learning goal Demands on memory Demands on attention Demands on their ability to process the language of instruction Assumptions about the level of intellectual abstraction that learners are capable of Potential to activate learner motivation, Be more efficient and effective at reading, summarizing, and asking critical questions about peer-reviewed original research in educational psychology, Be more comfortable and skilled at facilitating learning for another person (through questioning, listening, and observing learners at work), 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, KCM-HE) (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: HD 3150
class title: Language and Power
description: In this course, we will explore how language interacts with power: how does language reflect, shape, threaten and reinforce power relations in human society? From childhood through old age, language is an ever-present source of symbolic power. We use it to develop and express our identities, to position ourselves in hierarchies, and to establish group membership and exclusion throughout life. Language shapes ourselves, our families, our social lives, and our institutions. Understanding how people use language can provide a window into hidden aspects of both individuals and the social world.
outcome: To develop skills for thinking, speaking, and writing critically about social scientific questions., To apply these skills in analyzing the papers we discuss in class., To understand the role of language in the social world and its power structures., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 3190
class title: Memory and the Law
description: Focuses on how the scientific study of human memory interfaces with the theory and practice of law.
outcome: Students will demonstrate the presentation of clear and effective arguments in a written communication format., Students will demonstrate their ability to understand and apply course material in an objective manner., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, PBS-HE) (KCM-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one of the following: HD 1130 , PSYCH 1101, or PSYCH 2650.

class: HD 3210
class title: Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience
description: As it is with much of scientific discovery, a poet, William Wordsworth, best explained development with a simple phrase: The Child is father of the Man (person). In this course, we explore how our adult selves come to be through the lens of Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience. You will learn about current perspectives and controversies, the latest understanding of the development of multiple physiological systems (e.g., vision, perception, language, etc.) as interactions between molecular mechanisms, experience, and neural plasticity. Weekly short reaction papers, class exercises, and midterm and final projects, will all be geared towards developing a personal appreciation for the subject as well as an understanding of the issues in developmental cognitive neuroscience as a field.
outcome: Students will show a nuanced understanding of the competing and complementary theories of developmental neuroscience through reaction papers and class participation., Students will demonstrate the ability to find, read, and synthesize disciplinary literature by completing a review of primary developmental neuroscience literature on a topic that is innately interesting to them., Students will demonstrate the ability to generate and engage in scientific discourse through discussant roles, in-class presentations, and general class discussion both in-class and in the online forums., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, KCM-HE, PBS-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, KCM-AG, OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: an introductory course in human development and at least one introductory course in behavioral neuroscience or biological basis of behavior.

class: HD 3310
class title: Psychology of Gender
description: This course explores psychological research on gender, examining the interactions between biology and social learning, gender identity, stereotypes, gender diversity, and discrimination. We will critically evaluate gender with respect to cognition, attitudes, leadership, close relationships, psychological and physical development, achievement, communication, and health. Our engagement with course material will use an intersectional approach that acknowledges that gender development, expression, and experience are deeply impacted by race, social class, sexuality, ability, and culture. 
outcome: Students will learn how to examine research methodology to critically evaluate empirical research on sex differences in various outcome measures., Engagement in the Process of Discovery: Students will write research papers based on data they collect., Multi-Cultural Competence: Students will explore the complicated construct of intersectionality as it applies to the psychology of gender, reading about and discussing the ways in which gender, race, class, sexuality, and culture interact with one another., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PSYCH 1101 or HD 1130. Recommended prerequisite: HD 2600.

class: HD 3820
class title: Prejudice and Stereotyping
description: Social group membership - based on race and ethnicity, class, sexual orientation, sex, gender and gender identity, etc. and their intersection- can profoundly influence one's experience of the world and each other.  Through this course we will cover the basic experimental social psychology research on thoughts and beliefs (stereotypes), evaluative attitudes (prejudice), and behaviors (discrimination) that are based on group membership. We will explore how empirical research developed from primarily examining explicit (blatant) prejudice in the 20th century to recent examinations of implicit forms of stereotyping and prejudice. We will explore how stereotyping and prejudice can arise from basic perceptual and categorical processes, discuss strategies for minimizing expressed bias in interpersonal situations, and examine the experience of high status - and the consequences of losing it. The ultimate aim is to enhance your ability to evaluate and analyze the scientific merit of this research and apply it to real world social issues.
distribution categories: (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 4000
class title: Directed Readings
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent study.

class: HD 4010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves data collection and analysis or laboratory or studio projects.

class: HD 4020
class title: Supervised Fieldwork
description: For study that involves both responsible participation in a community setting and reflection on that experience through discussion, reading, and writing. Academic credit is awarded for this integration of theory and practice.

class: HD 4030
class title: Teaching Assistantship
description: For study that includes assisting faculty with instruction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: either HD 1150 or PSYCH 1101, and two intermediate-level HD courses, or equivalent courses in psychology or sociology. Students must have taken course and received B+ or higher.

class: HD 4110
class title: Advanced Seminar in Psychopathology
description: This course provides an overview to the theory, concepts, and controversies underlying common psychological disorders, as well as an introduction to transdiagnostic perspectives on mental health.
outcome: To enhance students' knowledge of the symptom presentation and manifestation of common forms of psychopathology.  Students will be able to identify and describe not just individual symptoms but also how symptoms may align with each other in predictable ways., To highlight broad conceptual challenges and methodological principles of the scientific study of psychopathology, including the definition, operationalization, and measurement of psychological problems.  Students will gain a deeper understanding of the scientific methods needed to study psychological disorders., To cultivate a greater awareness of the moral, ethical, and societal issues underlying diagnosis, treatment, and the emergence and persistence of psychopathology., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Required prerequisite: HD 3300 - Developmental Psychopathology / PSYCH 3310 - Developmental Psychopathology or HD 3320 - Gender and Psychopathology 

class: HD 4250
class title: Translational Research on Decision Making
description: Introductory laboratory-based course focusing on basic foundations in translational research on decision making across the lifespan. The course introduces students to hands-on applications of research skills in the context of research on decision making, spanning basic and applied research in law, medicine, behavioral economics, and policy. It focuses on such topics as human subjects protection, working with populations across the lifespan (e.g., children, seniors), database development, working with external partners and stakeholders (e.g., schools, hospitals), and basic concepts and techniques in decision research. Students participate in weekly laboratory meetings in small teams focused on specific projects as well as monthly meetings in which all teams participate. During laboratory meetings, students discuss ongoing research, plans for new studies, and interpretations of empirical findings from studies that are in progress or have been recently completed. New students work closely with experienced students and eventually work more independently. In order to fully grasp how the research projects fit into the broader field, students read relevant papers weekly and write reaction responses. Because several projects are ongoing at all times, students have the opportunity to be involved in more than one study and are assigned multiple tasks such as piloting research paradigms, subject recruitment, data collection, data analysis, and data entry. Students attend a weekly lab meeting for 1.5 hours per week, read pertinent papers, write reaction responses, and work 10.5 hours per week in the laboratory completing tasks that contribute to ongoing research studies.
outcome: Be able to know and evaluate evidence-based hypotheses., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 1130 or PSYCH 1101, also HD 2830 and HD 5750 and HD 5760.

class: HD 4260
class title: Translational Research on Memory and Neuroscience
description: Laboratory-based course focusing on basic foundations in translational research on the neuroscience of human memory and memory development. Students attend a weekly lab meeting for 1.5 hours per week, read pertinent papers, write reaction responses, and work 10.5 hours per week in the laboratory completing tasks that contribute to ongoing research studies.
outcome: Be able to interpret results of statistical analyses with respect to theory., 
distribution categories: (PBS-HE) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite:  HD 1130 or PSYCH 1101 and HD 2600.

class: HD 4331
class title: Event Cognition: How Minds, Brains and Bodies Experience Events
description: People experience and remember complex and dynamic environments as events. This seminar draws on work from cognitive neuroscience to characterize how people shape experience into events, and how these processes support adaptive behavior. The course will start with discussions of historical and modern perspectives about the relationships between minds, bodies, and experience. We will then cover topics ranging from the perception of motion and causality to social learning and interaction. The primary goals are for you to be able to (1) read and evaluate research in psychology, cognitive science, and neuroscience, and (2) describe and understand the implications of this research for how minds and bodies are adapted to everyday situations.
distribution categories: (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a course in PSYCH, COGST, HD, or NBB.

class: HD 4540
class title: Creativity and Its Development
description: This course will survey theory, research, and practice with regard to human creativity and its development. An especial emphasis will be on how to use research findings in the service of developing your own creativity. Examples of topics will include theories of creativity, research on creativity, improving creativity, mental health and creativity, and the dark side of creativity.
outcome: Understand the nature of creativity and how creativity can be studied empirically., Understand how to measure creativity., Understand how the nature of creativity varies across different historical periods and different cultures., Create a term project that seeks to understand an aspect of creativity in depth., Understand the relationship between creativity and other psychological constructs, such as intelligence and wisdom., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: HD 4550
class title: The Psychology of Wisdom
description: This course will cover the psychology of wisdom.  Among the topics to be covered are the definition of wisdom, theories and models of wisdom, development of wisdom, measurement of wisdom, relations of wisdom to other characteristics, state versus trait characteristics of wisdom, teaching for wisdom, wisdom and leadership, wisdom and society.
outcome: Disciplinary knowledge., Apply multi-disciplinary perspectives., Think critically., Write, speak, and use visual communications effectively., Understand moral and ethical reasoning using wisdom., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, HA-HE, KCM-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: HD 4580
class title: The Science of Social Behavior
description: This is a capstone seminar for seniors who are interested in graduate or professional study in scientific disciplines that focus on human behavior and social interaction. The intent is to provide seniors with an opportunity to summon, integrate, and apply insights that they have acquired over the course of their undergraduate education, and give prospective graduate students the opportunity to lead discussions in a large introductory lecture course, "Six Pretty Good Books". Each seminar member is part of a two or three-person team that leads the discussion together, under the supervision of a graduate teaching assistant. Seminar meetings are devoted to building lesson plans for leading an effective discussion of each of the six books. The authors vary from year to year but include Malcolm Gladwell, Michelle Alexander, Nate Silver, and Nicholas Christakis. All authors have agreed to participate in a "Q&amp;A" session with the students which seminar members are required to attend.
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: HD 4610
class title: Community and Residential Services in Geriatric and Palliative Care
description: This course serves as a companion class for students admitted to the Geriatric/Palliative Immersion Program. Students in this course will learn about the continuum of geriatric/palliative care and different types of community-based and residential services that support it. They will hear first-hand perspectives from different providers and stakeholders and learn about ongoing research within the field.
outcome: Understand key components of a community-based geriatric/palliative continuum of care., Appreciate the diverse perspectives of providers and stakeholders in community settings., Summarize the rationale behind a concrete research question in the field., Communicate methods and findings to diverse audiences., 

class: HD 4850
class title: Professional Development in Translational Research
description: As a supplement to their immersive learning experience working on faculty research projects, students in this course will engage with actors and ideas from across the youth development research and practice communities, learn about research methods and dissemination to various audiences, and begin to see the world from a translational research perspective.
outcome: Students will appreciate the role of translational research within the field of youth development., Students will synthesize research literature., Students will be able to communicate findings to practitioner audiences., Students will reflect on and evaluate their research lab experiences., 

class: HD 4860
class title: Nearest Neighbor
description: As a supplement to their immersive learning experience working on translational research projects led by CHE faculty, and building on their experience in HD4850 (Professional Development in Translational Research), this course will provide opportunities for students to put their learning into practice by proposing and implementing a translational research project in collaboration with community partners.
outcome: Evaluate community needs and align them with research practicalities., Synthesize research literature in relation to a real-world problem., Communicate methods and findings to practitioner audiences., Appreciate the role of translational research within the field of youth development., Conduct a translational research project in a community., 

class: HD 4990
class title: Senior Honors Thesis
description: This course is for students doing research as part of the Honors Program in Human Development.

class: HD 5750
class title: Quantitative Methods I
description: This course is a rigorous introduction to graduate statistics for social sciences. We will briefly review descriptive statistics and probability theory. We will discuss fundamental inferential frameworks at length, with a focus on Frequentist and Bayesian statistics.  The remainder of the semester will be focused on the analysis of randomized studies.
outcome: You will gain proficiency in coding in R to achieve a variety of data-analytic tasks., You will be able understand different designs for randomized studies, including factorial designs., You will be able to apply appropriate inferential statistics, ranging from p-values, Bayes Factors, confidence intervals, and credible intervals., 

class: HD 6020
class title: Research in Risk and Rational Decision Making
description: This hands-on laboratory course will develop research skills in the context of risk and rational decision making in human development from multiple disciplinary perspectives and with respect to different kinds of decision-making under risk and uncertainty.  Topics will depend on student interests but may include decisions about war, terrorism, cancer control and prevention (e.g., screening tests), personal behaviors that involve risk (e.g., HIV prevention), and other public health risks (e.g., vaccinations), law enforcement (e.g., use of a weapon), and legal decision making (e.g., jury deliberations). Students will read the research literature, discuss the latest empirical findings and scientific theories of risk and rationality, and engage in group work and peer review to hone their skills.  Students will then design research projects and engage in research activities as well as read additional references tailored to their interests.

class: HD 6190
class title: Memory and the Law
description: Focuses on how the scientific study of human memory interfaces with the theory and practice of law.  Students study relevant areas of memory research and memory theory.
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, PBS-HE)

class: HD 6200
class title: First-Year Proseminar in Human Development
description: Designed as an orientation to the department and the university. Activities include attendance at research presentations, visits to departmental research laboratories, relevant informational sessions (e.g., Institutional Review Board for Human Participants, proposal writing), and guidance in preparing a public research presentation to be made at the end of spring semester.

class: HD 6540
class title: Creativity and Its Development

class: HD 6550
class title: The Psychology of Wisdom

class: HD 6610
class title: Text and Networks in Social Science Research
description: This is a course on networks and text in quantitative social science. The course will cover published research using text and social network data, focusing on health, politics, and everyday life, and it will introduce methods and approaches for incorporating high-dimensional data into familiar research designs. Students will evaluate past studies and propose original research.
outcome: Learn to critically evaluate empirical research that uses text as data or social network analysis., Connect fundamentals of research design to high-dimensional data analysis., Develop verbal and written skills via in-class discussion, presentations, and written assignments., Learn to represent complex relationships quantitatively and conduct high-dimensional data analyses using statistical programming., Learn methods for avoiding over-fitting in high-dimensional data analysis., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 5760 or GOVT 6029 or SOC 6020 or equivalent.

class: HD 6810
class title: Proseminar in Affective and Clinical Science I
description: This course is intended as a professional development seminar for graduate students hoping to pursue research that integrates affective and clinical science. It is modeled after the popular "Brown Bag" courses at peer institutions.  Class meetings will blend student presentations; workshopping of emerging research; analysis of classic and recently published scholarship in the field; and visiting speakers. Students will gain a deeper understanding of the scientific methods needed to study this topic and build the skills required for an academic career - while simultaneously developing a community of scholars with shared interests in this area of research.

class: HD 7000
class title: Directed Readings
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent study.

class: HD 7010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves collection and analysis of research data.

class: HD 7020
class title: Practicum
description: For study that predominantly involves field experience in community settings.

class: HD 8060
class title: Teaching Practicum
description: For advanced graduate students who independently develop and teach an undergraduate topics course under the supervision of a faculty member.

class: HD 8990
class title: Master's Thesis and Research
description: This course is for Master's students doing research for their Master's thesis.

class: HD 9990
class title: Doctoral Thesis and Research
description: This course is for Ph.D. students doing research for their doctoral thesis.

class: HE 1112
class title: Academic Well-Being Seminar

class: HE 1115
class title: Critical Reading and Thinking
description: In this course, students will gain greater awareness of how they manage their time and how they work with themselves. Through self-study and self-reflection, students will examine their ways of doing things and practice different approaches to time management, improving sleep and managing stress, as well as study skills including test preparation, reading, writing and problem-solving. Learning outcomes: students will develop greater self-awareness of their tendencies and how they do things, and will be able to evaluate how they are doing in terms of academics and personal well-being.

class: HE 1150
class title: FWS: Topics in Health Equity
description: Topics in the Health Equity First-Year Writing Seminar examine the biological, cultural, environmental, policy and societal factors that allow all humans to lead healthy lives, and the factors that create health inequity and equity. Students will engage with a variety of reading materials and writing styles to develop their communication skills and tools for achieving health equity for all humans. Topics vary by semester.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HE 1151
class title: FWS: Topics in Sustainability & Society
description: Topics in the Sustainability &amp; Society First-Year Writing Seminar examine the dynamic and interconnected relationship between humans and the environment, with a focus on how humans shape, and are shaped by, the environment. Students will engage with a variety of reading materials and writing styles to explore diverse perspectives and possibilities for cultivating a resilient and sustainable society. Topics vary by semester.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HE 1152
class title: FWS: Topics in Technology and Human Flourishing
description: Topics in the Technology &amp; Human Flourishing&amp;nbsp;First-Year Writing Seminar focus on the role of technology in addressing societal challenges and enhancing the human condition, across various fields such as healthcare, design, or sustainability. Students will engage with a variety of reading materials and writing styles that analyze, inform and advocate for technology as a transformative tool for improving human well-being. Topics vary by semester.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HE 1200
class title: Partnership Program
description: The Human Ecology Peer Partnership Program provides mentorship through a network of faculty and upper-class students to incoming students of color, specifically during their first semester.

class: HE 1800
class title: Blazing Your Trail in Human Ecology
description: This 1-credit, S/U course is an advising seminar that orients new students to Human Ecology and Cornell, including knowledge and strategies of how to be successful in college. The class prioritizes opportunities for students to explore identity and belonging and situate their academic and career pathways within their contexts of their values and goals. Through readings, written reflections, and in-class discussions, students will develop a four-year plan, foster skills to direct their own learning, gain familiarity with Cornell's code of academic integrity, and learn strategies to balance academic success, health and wellbeing. Students also practice skills to engage responsibly with others across diverse perspectives and to be able to learn with and from their communities, both on and off campus. 
outcome: Students will learn about strategies and resources to be successful in college and gain agency in navigating their academic pathways., Students will practice skills to communicate effectively, engage with diverse perspectives, and learn about cultural humility in preparation for community-engaged experiences., 

class: HE 3100
class title: Mentoring in Higher Education
description: The primary objective of the mentoring course is to encourage high standards of scholarship and leadership in the College of Human Ecology through peer mentorship. The program provides peer mentors with the opportunity to reflect on their practice while encouraging high quality achievement, professional ethics and devotion to services in this area of the sciences.

class: HE 3301
class title: BCTR Scholars Reflection

class: HE 4030
class title: Apprenticeship in Teaching

class: HE 4040
class title: Human Ecology Exchange Program
description: Human Ecology students may extend their experience off-campus with exchange programs.  Students should meet with their academic advisors or student development counselors to discuss their options.

class: HE 4060
class title: Special Topics in Translational Research
description: Translational research involves the bidirectional transfer of knowledge between research and practice. In this course, students will learn and apply research on a special topic within translational research and learn with and from community partners. Each section has a unique topical and partnership focus.
outcome: Understand the bidirectional transfer of knowledge between research and practice., Understand the perspectives of researchers and practitioners., Communicate and/or collaborate effectively with community members and practitioners., Apply disciplinary learning and skills to community issues and/or human needs., Describe and reflect on connections between personal experience, community-engaged experiences, and academic theories, concepts, and ideas., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: students should have completed introductory coursework in psychology, human development, or sociology.

class: HEBRW 1101
class title: Elementary Modern Hebrew I
description: Intended for beginners. Provides a thorough grounding in reading, writing, grammar, oral comprehension, and speaking. Students who complete the course are able to function in basic situations in a Hebrew-speaking environment.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: HEBRW 1103
class title: Elementary Modern Hebrew III
description: Sequel to HEBRW 1101-HEBRW 1102. Continued development of reading, writing, grammar, oral comprehension, and speaking skills.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of Hebrew or permission of instructor.

class: HEBRW 3101
class title: Advanced Modern Hebrew I
description: This constitutes the first course in our third year of the Modern Hebrew language sequence.  Development of speech proficiency will be emphasized. Over the course of the semester, students will develop reading comprehension through reading a variety of fiction and nonfiction texts, listening comprehension through screening of filmic works and episodes drawn from popular television series, writing through communication about what is read and screened, as well as more personal topics, and speech through in class discussion and oral presentations.  Readings will include authentic and partially adapted contemporary short stories, poems and newspaper articles.  
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HEBRW 2100 with a grade equivalent to C- or above or permission of instructor.

class: HEBRW 3103
class title: Advanced Hebrew Through Media
description: This course is intended to continue the development of all aspects of Hebrew language skills. Emphasis, however, will be placed on speaking skills and understanding through the use of various outlets in Israeli media: television, film, online sources, newspapers, songs and literature. The use of text and media material relevant to Israeli contemporary society and culture will help the students to gain better understanding of Israeli society and culture.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HEBRW 3102 or permission of instructor.

class: HEBRW 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Hebrew
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: HEBRW 5510
class title: Graduate Studies in Hebrew
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: HIERO 1450
class title: Ancient Egyptian I: Introduction to Middle Egyptian Hieroglyphs
description: From ca. 2100 BC to the Roman era, hieroglyphs representing the Middle Egyptian language were inscribed on texts, objects and architecture. In this initial course students learn how the language was written and how it worked, including how words were written and how sentences were constructed with and without verbs. Along the way we will be reading short excerpts from Egyptian texts as part of the textbook's exercises, emphasizing grammar rather than textual or thematic analysis. The student who completes this and the second course that focuses on the verbal system will be well-equipped to pursue detailed study of Egyptian classics such as The Eloquent Peasant, Tale of Sinuhe, and Book of the Dead, as well as shorter inscriptions found on objects and monuments.

class: HINDI 1121
class title: Elementary Hindi I
description: Designed for students who have no prior background in Hindi and wish to develop some basic speaking and written skills. This course offers a balanced treatment of speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing skills. By the end of the Elementary Hindi sequence, students will be able to (1) converse and comprehend conversations on topics such as personal needs and social activities; (2) listen and communicate main ideas of simple stories and conversations in Hindi; (3) read aloud/pronounce and write in Hindi-Urdu scripts at satisfactory speed; (4) familiarize themselves with the language through the meaning cultural contexts and background.
prerequisites/co-requisites: No prior background or permission of the instructor

class: HINDI 2201
class title: Intermediate Hindi I
description: This is an intermediate-level course in Hindi. Students' competence in all four language areas will become extraordinarily strong and solid. This course will work on building up their confidence in describing complicated situations and ideas in the target language, improve their ability to read and write with better flow and accuracy, and increase their listening comprehension to more detailed and complicated materials.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HINDI 1102.

class: HINDI 2203
class title: Intermediate Hindi Reading and Writing for Heritage Students I
description: Throughout this course sequence all aspects of language learning are practiced; listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Video materials are used and the emphasis is on the conversational aspect of the language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HINDI 1102 or equal level of competency or permission of instructor.

class: HINDI 3301
class title: Advanced Hindi I
description: Selected readings in modern Hindi literature. Continued work on fluency in speaking Hindi on an advanced level. There will be a combination of different reading materials from literature, journals, newspapers, and many social, entertainment, and political magazines in Hindi. Discussions will be based on those readings and articles, hence giving opportunities to express views and opinions in a fluent and effective manner.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HINDI 2202 or permission of instructor.

class: HIST 1180
class title: FWS: Viking America
description: Five centuries before Columbus'​s fateful journey, Europeans in flimsy wooden ships were trekking westward across the Atlantic.​ This course examines the Norse discovery of America ca. 1000 AD, focusing on the so-called 'Vínland sagas.' We will study these sagas as medieval historians' attempts to write about their own past, contrasting their works with modern historians' takes on the same issues. We will also engage with Native American perspectives, with the contact zone between texts and material evidence, and with the afterlife of the Norse journeys in popular imagination. Students will write short essays reviewing and reassessing existing historiography, with the aim of refining our sense of the relationship between events and their textualisation, both now and in the past.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HIST 1200
class title: FWS: Writing History
description: How can we learn about the past? How do we tell stories about the past? How do we judge the truth of falsity of evidence? Writing History seminars introduce students to many different ways of interpreting and writing about the past, and to the wide range of sources that historians use: from diaries to tax rolls, from scraps of textile to films and advertisements. Topics and readings vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HIST 1321
class title: FWS: Post-World War II America: Crisis and Continuity
description: Why are the years following World War II considered so remarkable in the landscape of American history? Several critical events and debates that rocked the nation from the 1940s onward reverberate today, such as involvement in wars, civil rights, women's rights, concerns about teenagers, and crises in American cities. Enriched by a variety of primary sources, including films and TV shows, this course analyzes the central events, people, and forces that transformed American society and culture from the years after World War II to the present. The course aims to help students learn how to write persuasively about scholarship and primary sources, while gaining a deeper appreciation for the lasting influence of the major events, crises, and interpretations of post-World War II American history.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: HIST 1411
class title: FWS: Facts, Frauds, and Rumors: (Un)Truth in Western History
description: Societies reveal much about themselves in how they define and distinguish truth and untruth. This course examines the history of facts, frauds, and gossip in the West, from the late medieval period to present. We will focus on five historical episodes in the making and unmaking of truth: the medieval inquisition; the first early modern scientific laboratories; the "Feejee Mermaid" and other playful frauds of P.T. Barnum's American Museum; early 20th-century newsrooms, advertising and propaganda agencies; and the 21st-century Internet. We will write, workshop, and revise reflective, comparative, and persuasive essays on these episodes, while gaining a better understanding of how such modern concepts as objectivity, reliability, and deception have developed.

class: HIST 1425
class title: FWS: Writing Historical Graphic Novels
description: In this course we will learn how to create our own short historical graphic novel based on a primary source (or a series of primary sources) from the Cornell Archives. The goal of this project is to learn how to find primary sources, to transform them into a historical narrative, and to communicate this narrative in an engaging manner—the primary work of historians. The first half of the semester will be dedicating to reading graphic novels and meeting with their creators to talk about the process. In the second part of the semester, we will be working closely with the staff at the Olin Library's Rare and Manuscript Collections to identify a primary source, craft a narrative, and give it an artistic form.

class: HIST 1571
class title: American Defense Policy and Military History from the Two World Wars to the Global War on Terror
description: America is finishing up two wars, one in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. They have been the longest wars in American history and have ended amid much ambivalence about the US engagement in each place and the results. They are part of a series of wars that America has fought as a global power, with a global reach, sending its forces thousands of miles from home. That global reach is not new, and goes back all the way to 1898 and the Spanish-American War. This course will look at the American military experience from our first tentative steps onto the global stage in 1898, to the earth-spanning conflicts of World War I and II, to the nuclear tension of Cold War conflicts, and finish with the current Long War against terrorism, and the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 1576
class title: War in U.S. History: From the Frontier to the Wars on Terror
description: Is war a "way of life" for Americans, as some historians have suggested? In recent years, many Americans have come to think about war as something that happens "over there", away from our own shores, but war – the act of fighting itself, as well as the political, economic and social demands of mobilisation, and the foreign and domestic consequences of military violence – has shaped the United States in countless ways. This course explores both the shadow of war – the seen and unseen effects it has on people and societies – and the substance – the wars themselves – to explore America's relationships with the rest of the world, from the revolutionary period to the present day. At the same time, we we'll also examine non-military and quasi-military encounters between Americans and peoples abroad, including tourism, romantic entanglements, business relationships, and religious proselytising, asking "what is war?", and even whether the United States has ever been at peace. Through this multi-layered focus we will discover some of the many ways in which Americans have thought about, engaged with, impacted, and been impacted by, the world beyond the country's borders, and the extent to which war and violence have played a prominent role in those interactions.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 1590
class title: History and Popular Culture in Africa
description: This course uses a multidisciplinary approach to explore the complex relationship between history and popular culture in Africa. The course considers two main questions - How can you write history using popular culture? And how do artists use history to create popular culture? It uses examples from around the continent to explore old and new forms of popular culture; forms of cultural expression used by historians; as well as the ways in which artists use moments of great historical significance or key historical actors in their works. We consider, for example, the work of Leroy Vail who used songs by Mozambican peasants to write a social history of colonialism as well as films about colonialism by African film-makers such as the late Ousman Sembene.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 1600
class title: History of Law: Great Trials
description: Through discussion of a variety of high-profile and lesser-known trials throughout history, this course will examine a range of issues in the history of law and criminality. We will study the relationship between ideology and law in different societies, the politics of trials, the theory and practice of punishment, and the relationship of trials to terror(ism) and social marginalization. Cases to be covered include: Socrates, Jesus Christ, Joan of Arc, the French Revolutionary Terror, the Russian revolutionary terrorists, the Dreyfus Affair, the Stalinist show trials, Charles Manson, OJ Simpson, and Pussy Riot.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, HST-AS) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: HIST 1621
class title: From Samurai to Superpower: Japan in World History I
description: How did Japan evolve from samurai to superpower?   We investigate this transformation in Japanese and world history over a two-semester sequence.  Students are free to enroll in either semester independently.  (All are welcome, but none required, to enroll in both semesters.)  We begin in early Japan: the birthplace of the sun goddess Amaterasu, the imperial court devoted to her, and the samurai who rose to rule under her sway.  Early Japan was also home to con-men and courtesans, mischievous gods and warring Buddhists, the world's first (and female!) novelist, and a surprisingly cosmopolitan culture of artists and scientists, comedians and entrepreneurs, human traffickers and international travelers.  Our first semester exploring this eclectic culture culminates in the early modern era (1600–1868), when under samurai rule, Japan developed many "modern" elements that laid the groundwork for the revolutionary changes and superpower status examined in the second semester.  We chart Japan's development not only through big events but also everyday life, delving into gender and sexuality, family and labor, arts and entertainment, and more.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 1770
class title: U.S. History through Literature
description: This lecture course combines historical and literary approaches to explore the inner life of Americans over the last two hundred years. No prior knowledge of US history is assumed. We'll examine the ways in which historical context can shape literary works and the ways in which literature, in turn, can shape history.  How have Americans imagined themselves and their nation?  Has there ever been a stable American identity? The focus will be on literary works that pose questions about race, gender, individualism, and belonging, allowing us to see how writers have both reinforced and resisted cultural pressures.  My hope is that tracing US history through works of the imagination will help in the collective (and perpetual) effort to reimagine American life.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 1951
class title: Foreign Policy as Subversion
description: To what extent does the ideal of the US as a vanguard for democracy and freedom in the world match up with other aspects—military, economic, and humanitarian—of US foreign policy? This same question about the degree to which discourses and practices correspond might be asked of other countries, like the Soviet Union, China, and Britain, but this course examines the ways in which US foreign policy has been deployed over the course of the twentieth century and the ways those policies have been perceived and received by people living in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Particular case studies will be addressed stemming from the faculty's specializations (for example, Vietnam, Cambodia, Guatemala, and Chile) and the emphasis is on the role of the United States in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Prominent themes will include forms of subversion, from military muscle to economic coercion, and how and why they have changed over time; meanings of liberty, democracy, freedom, and sovereignty in different places and times; popular responses to policies and actions of foreign administrations; the relationships between sovereign states and transnational corporations; the uses and abuses of History in the formulation and justification of policy initiatives and in local responses to them; and the complexities involved in discerning internal and external forces in an increasingly transnational world.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 1985
class title: American History from 1500 to 1800
description: On the eve of the American Revolution Britain administered 26 colonies—not just the 13 that would become the United States. British North America's dramatic struggle for independence has led many history textbooks to read the revolution back into colonial history, focusing on those 13 North American colonies that would become the United States, often at the expense of global connections that defined the colonial and revolutionary periods. As this class will explore, key elements of early American history can only be understood through a broader perspective, from the economic growth of New England as a result of the African slave trade and exchange in the Caribbean, to the use of citizenship as a category of exclusion in response to the myriad inhabitants—European, Indigenous, and African—who neighbored or lived within the original 13 colonies. In this course, we will explore the history of early America from the 1490s through the 1800s from a global perspective. Voices usually peripheral to the narrative of American development, from enslaved African mariners to Spanish American nuns, will become central to processes of cultural encounter, labor exploitation, revolutionary upheavals, and state formation that shaped the making and unmaking early America.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2001
class title: Supervised Reading - Undergraduate
description: Independent Study based supervised reading with history faculty.  Student must complete Independent Study Form with faculty supervisor for determining requirements and for permission to enroll through the online system (https://data.arts.cornell.edu/as-stus/indep_study_intro.cfm).  Student then work with their faculty supervisor throughout the semester for successful completion and grading of the agreed upon requirements.

class: HIST 2055
class title: Race and Slavery in the Early Atlantic World
description: The legacies of slavery remain all too obvious in the modern Atlantic World. From demographic imbalances to pervasive social and economic inequality, much of the recent past has involved addressing that destructive early modern heritage. This course traces the roots of slavery and race in the Atlantic World from 1400 to 1800. Through lectures, readings, and class discussion, we will examine how politics, culture, gender, and the law intersected to shape the institution of slavery and the development of conceptions of race. As an Atlantic World course, we will take a comparative perspective and ask how different imperial regimes (Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English) fostered different systems of race and slavery in the Americas. We will also ask how the law as a lived experience, gender norms, and imperial politics all worked to shape the production of racial hierarchies.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2083
class title: A Land to Call Our Own: De-Colonizing Medieval Europe
description: Colonial projects have a bad reputation; no one in their right mind would choose to identify as a colonizer, much less a colonialist. This was not always the case. In the 1800s, colonialism was the height of civilized accomplishment; everyone wanted in on it. In this course, we shift our gaze farther back in time to examine the thoughts and practices of people in medieval Europe. We delve into questions of function and type (is there a difference between colonization and colonialism?), of perspective and bias (does it matter how recent a colony is?), of social, cultural, regional, and temporal variation. By highlighting the non-self-evidence of truths we hold, the medieval past can help us appreciate why we cherish them nonetheless – or prompt us to re-evaluate them.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2151
class title: War in Experience and Expression: Origins of Modern War-Writing, 1500-1900
description: This seminar treats the tension between the compelling moral, historical and psychological imperatives to represent armed conflict and the rhetorical difficulties attendant on doing so. Through critical and contextual analysis of texts situated within the modern European tradition of war-writing, students will examine the motives which make the accurate rendering of war both necessary and impossible: to impose order and meaning on the chaos of violence, to commemorate the victims without inducing guilt in the survivors, to celebrate individual acts of heroism while promoting collective peace, but above all to bring to bear the resources of linguistic expression on an experience of extremity which ultimately resists discursive mediation and, despite its ubiquity in human history, subverts our conception of the ordinary and challenges established analytic taxonomies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2207
class title: East Asian Medical and Martial Arts
description: East Asian medicinal and martial arts, whether practiced in East Asia or in other parts of the world, have been important points of contact for people within and between often marginalized communities. In this course we will study the twentieth century development of East Asian combat and healing traditions, and the transport of those disciplines to the U.S. We will examine the personal, community, national, and global stakes of East Asian arts for those who invest in suppressing, teaching, and practicing them. We will consider how East Asian martial and medical practices relate, for example, to global and local histories of orientalism, colonialism, migration, and racism, and to historical post-colonial, anti-racist, feminist, and LGBTQ movements. Over the course of the semester, we will research martial and medical arts as they have been practiced in Ithaca, and place these local histories into their broader historical contexts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2253
class title: Diasporas from the Spanish Caribbean
description: This seminar examines the Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican diasporas in the United States. We will examine US relations with these three countries; the root causes of this Caribbean migration; their history in particular urban areas of the United States; and the political, social, and cultural issues that have attracted attention.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2354
class title: African American Visions of Africa
description: This seminar examines some of the political and cultural visions of Africa and Africans held by African-American intellectuals and activists in the 19th and 20th centuries. Emphasis is placed on the philosophies of black nationalism, Pan Africanism and anticolonialism and the themes of emigration, expatriation, repatriation and exile. Awareness of Africa and attitudes toward the continent and its peoples have profoundly shaped African-American identity, culture and political consciousness. Notions of a linked fate between Africans and black Americans have long influenced black life and liberation struggles within the U.S. The motives, purposes and outlooks of African-American theorists who have claimed political, cultural, or spiritual connection to Africa and Africans have varied widely, though they have always powerfully reflected black experiences in America and in the West. The complexity and dynamism of those views belie simplistic assumptions about essential or "natural" relationships, and invite critical contemplation of the myriad roles that Africa has played in the African-American mind."
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2371
class title: US Climate Catastrophes: Rethinking US History through the Climate
description: How does our understanding of the current climate emergency change when we examine the past with an environmental lens? In this course, we will think of US history through climate catastrophes, human-made and naturally occurring, to consider how humans and the environment have interacted with each other over time and to reconsider how that relationship has changed within a US context. Rather than focus on the traditional turning points of the US, such as wars or presidents, we will look at the California Gold Rush, the use of DDT, the building of the Oahe Dam, the Love Canal, and 21st-century hurricanes.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2391
class title: From Terra Incognita to Territories of Nation-States: Early American History in Two Dozen Maps
description: This course engages the rich cartographic record of colonial North America via an in-depth analysis of two dozen iconic maps. Integrating visual and textual analysis, students will assess human representations of space across cultural boundaries, explore change over time in the mapmaking practices of indigenous peoples and various European intruders, and study the evolving relationship between cartography and power, attending particularly to the process by which mapping promoted a revolutionary new understanding of American geography as composed of the bounded territories of nation-states.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 2452
class title: Dress, Cloth and Identity in Africa and the Diaspora
description: This course uses a multi-disciplinary approach to examine the importance of textiles in African social and economic history. It combines art history, anthropology, social and economic history to explore the role of textiles in marking status, gender, political authority and ethnicity. In addition, we examine the production and distribution of indigenous cloth and the consequences of colonial rule on African textile industries. Our analysis also considers the principles of African dress and clothing that shaped the African diaspora in the Americas as well as the more recent popularity and use of African fabrics and dress in the United States.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2562
class title: Medicine and Healing in China
description: An exploration of processes of change in health care practices in China. Focuses on key transitions, such as the emergence of canonical medicine, of Daoist approaches to healing and longevity, of "scholar physicians," and of "traditional Chinese medicine" in modern China. Inquries into the development of healing practices in relation to both popular and specialist views of the body and disease; health care as organized by individuals, families, communities, and states; the transmission of medical knowledge; and healer-patient relations. Course readings include primary texts in translation as well as secondary materials.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 2567
class title: Holocaust in History and Memory
description: This course explores the history of the Holocaust during which the Nazis murdered six million Jews. Topics covered in this class include the history of antisemitism in Europe and twentieth-century Germany, the origins and rule of the Nazis, the politics of World War II, the Final Solution and extermination camps, Jewish literary responses to the Holocaust, among other topics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 2627
class title: Introduction to Islam
description: This course is an introduction to the study of Islam and Islamic history. Organised historically, the lecture series will begin with the career of the Prophet Muhammad, before charting the course of the Islamic Conquests, the establishment, zenith and collapse of various Islamic Empires, ending with European colonialism. Along the way, this geopolitical and historical overview will provide a backdrop to our exploration of changes and developments in Islamic thought and practice. In particular, we will focus on the emergence of the Sunni-Shi'i conflict, the rise of Sufism and Salafism, as well as how scholars across time and space thought and wrote about questions of ideal Islamic governance, the religious authority of the caliph, women's role in society and public space, slavery, the ethics of living under non-Muslim rule and the place of non-Muslims in Islamic society.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2631
class title: The Global History of Time
description: We often define history as change over time, while overlooking that our ways of measuring, thinking about, and using time are themselves an important part of history. This lecture course examines that history on a global scale. Why have societies around the world spent so much effort over the centuries in studying, philosophizing, and inventing stories about time? How have clocks, calendars, and other timekeepers evolved? How have those devices helped re-organize society, industry, and science? Drawing on case studies from every continent, this course will familiarize students with the technological, political, social, and cultural histories of time, while developing their skills in analyzing primary sources such as art works, films, and literary texts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 2640
class title: Introduction to Asian American History
description: An introductory history of Chinese, Japanese, Asian Indians, Filipinos, and Koreans in the United States from the mid-nineteenth century to the 1990s. Major themes include racism and resistance, labor migration, community formation, imperialism, and struggles for equality.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2655
class title: American Political Thought
description: This course offers a survey of American political thought from the colonial period to the present. We will read Puritan sermons, revolutionary pamphlets, philosophical treatises, presidential orations, slave narratives, prison writings, and other classic texts, in order to understand the ideas and debates that have shaped American politics. Topics to be discussed will include the meaning of freedom, the relationship between natural rights and constitutional authority, the idea of popular sovereignty, theories of representation and state power, race and national identity, problems of inequality, and the place of religion in public life. Lectures will be organized around both historical context and close reading of primary texts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2665
class title: The American Revolutionary Era
description: As we approach the 250th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence, this course provides students with a comprehensive understanding of the origins, character, and results of the American Revolution, as well as engaging the enduring significance of its memory in contemporary American life - why do we choose to remember the American Revolution in ways that occlude its divisive and bloody events? This course explores many of the key themes of this critical period of American history: the rise of colonial opposition to Great Britain, the nature of the Revolutionary Wars, and the domestic "republican experiment" that followed the Treaty of Paris in 1783. The course emphasizes student interpretations with an eye toward analyzing the comparative experiences of women and men, "everyday people" and famous leaders, Native Americans, African-Americans, and those who opposed the Revolution.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2674
class title: History of the Modern Middle East
description: This course examines major trends in the evolution of the Middle East in the modern era. Focusing on the 19th and 20th centuries and ending with the "Arab Spring," we will consider Middle East history with an emphasis on five themes: imperialism, nationalism, modernization, Islam, and revolution. Readings will be supplemented with translated primary sources, which will form the backbone of class discussions.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2680
class title: Sex, Drugs, and Experimenting with Democracy in 1960s and 1970s America
description: Roots of the United States' most vexing problems can be traced to the 1960s and 1970s. This class explores the struggles to explain these turbulent decades in both popular memory and historical scholarship and the consequences of our interpretations for understanding today. Students will use movies and oral history to investigate the role of perspective, framing, and agency in historical analysis. We will examine the era's struggles over issues such as racial hierarchy, gender roles, abortion, climate change, economic inequality, war, drugs, crime, and democracy.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2710
class title: Introduction to the History of Medicine
description: This course offers an introductory survey of the history of medicine (principally in Europe and the United States) from classical antiquity to the early twentieth century. Using a combination of both primary and secondary sources, students will learn about the "Hippocratic Heritage" of contemporary western medicine; medicine in late antiquity; faith and healing in the medieval period; medicine and knowledge in the Islamic world; medicine during the Renaissance (particularly the rise of the mechanical philosophy); medicine in the age of Enlightenment; professionalization, women-doctors and midwives, and battles over 'quackery' in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; the role of medicine in colonialism and empire; and the promises and perils of modern medicine (dramatic decreases in mortality on the one hand, the rise of Eugenics and the importance of Medicine to the National Socialist State on the other). As well as this temporal survey, we will consider a number of ongoing themes: race, bodily difference, and medicine; medicine and the environment; women, gender, and medicine; the history of the body; the history of sexuality; and the close connections between forms of social order and forms of medical knowledge. The course meets three times a week (for two lectures and a section) and is open to all.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2792
class title: Monuments, Museums, and Memory: An Introduction to Public History
description: In this course we will examine how we have come to narrate social, cultural, and political history in the United States, investigating the ways scholarly, curatorial, archival, and creative practices shape conceptions of the American past, in particular understandings of racial, gender, sexual, and class oppression and resistance. Students will build skills in historical interpretation and archival research and explore possibilities and challenges in preserving and presenting the past in a variety of public contexts—monuments, memorials, museums, historical sites, movies and television, and community-based history projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 2852
class title: Judaism and the Origins of Christianity
description: Most people think of Christianity as the "daughter religion" of Judaism. In this course, we will see that what we now know as Judaism and Christianity both claimed ownership of the same textual tradition and emerged together from the same set of historical circumstances, shaped by political crisis, a radical transformation of the social order and the challenge of Graeco-Roman culture. Through close reading of the principal sources of Christian literature, such as Paul's letters to the first communities of gentile "believers" and the accounts of the life and death of the messiah, known collectively as the gospels, we will explore how and why the followers of Jesus first came to think of themselves as the "New Israel" and how a polemical engagement with their controversial interpretation of Hebrew prophecy shaped the development of the rabbinic movement in Roman Palestine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 2955
class title: Socialism in America
description: "Why no socialism in America?" Scholars and activists have long pondered the relative dearth (compared to other industrialized societies) of sustained, popular, anticapitalist activity in the United States. Sure, leftist movements in the U.S. have often looked and operated differently than those in other parts of the world. But many Americans have forged creative and vibrant traditions of anticapitalism under very difficult circumstances. This class examines socialist thought and practice in the U.S. from the 19th century to the present. We trace intersections of race, class, and gender while exploring the freedom dreams of those who have opposed capitalism in the very heart of global power.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2969
class title: The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Empire
description: This course surveys the history of the world's first socialist society from its unlikely beginnings in 1917 to its unexpected demise in 1991. Traditional topics such as the origins of the revolutions of 1917, Stalin's Terror, WW II, Khrushchev's Thaw, etc., will be covered, but lectures will emphasize the interaction between the political, socio-economic, and especially the cultural spheres. A good deal of the materials we will study in this course will be drawn from the realm of literature, cinema, and art.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 2996
class title: Korea and East Asia
description: This course reexamines Korea's place in East Asia by studying transnational cultural and intellectual interactions that Korea has had with China and Japan. The course is divided into three parts. First, it examines Korea's centuries-long participation in the China-centered East Asian world order and its exit from that world order around the turn of the twentieth century. Second, it turns to Japan's emergence as an expansionist power in East Asia, replacing China's long-term hegemony in the region, and the diverse ways Koreans and other East Asians, including the Japanese, coped with the Japan-centered new formation of the East Asian world order in the first half of the twentieth century. Third, the course moves to contemporary Korea and investigates the impact of the so-called Korean Wave (the global popularity of Korean popular culture) on Japanese society and Korea-Japan relations, giving students a chance to think deeply about the effects of Japanese colonialism on contemporary Korea-Japan relations and the possible role of culture in smoothing over ongoing political and diplomatic tensions between the two neighboring countries.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 3002
class title: Supervised Research - Undergraduate
description: Independent Study based supervised research with a history faculty member.  Student must complete an on-line Independent Study form with a faculty supervisor to determine requirements and for permission.  Students then work with their faculty supervisor throughout the semester for successful completion and grading of the agreed upon requirements.

class: HIST 3012
class title: Remembering Socialism: Literature and Film After the End of History
description: More than thirty years after the end of the Soviet Union, we have the distance needed to view the twentieth-century state socialist project from a historical perspective–even as Cold War tropes are revived amid another major confrontation with Russia. In this course, we will analyze memoirs, oral histories, historical fiction, films, and TV shows that look back at this period. How do the makers of these works use genre as a political as well as artistic tool? What are the political implications of comedy, cosplay, or melodrama when applied to communism? How does the portrayal of this period change as state socialism recedes into the distance? Texts from Russia, Ukraine, Germany, the Balkans, the UK, and the United States.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 3391
class title: Seminar on American Relations with China
description: A historical review of the fragile and volatile U.S.-China relationship from the opening by Richard Nixon in the early 1970s until the present. Several individual sessions will be led by current or former executive branch or congressional officials, business people, journalists, representatives of nongovernmental organizations and others who have worked in China or have participated in the making of U.S. policy toward China.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 3436
class title: History of the Cops: Racialized Policing in the US
description: The course will study the history of policing and race in the US. Beginning with the origins of American policing in a settler-colonial society, it will study the way whiteness emerged as an identity that depended on the control of both Indigenous and Black people. We will discuss the role of policing in national identity, the defense of slavery, American empire, the rise of urban industrialization, the emergence of professionalized policing, the control of immigrants, and the undermining of Reconstruction. The emergence of twentieth-century America, the identification of crime as a key political and the further development of racialized policing as a core fiscal and ideological project of the American state will be the main focus of the second half of the course. The course will also cover organization against racialized policing in particular as a major political project, source of identity, and root of both solidarity and estrangement between Black and other working class Americans.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: HIST 3653
class title: International Development in African History
description: This lecture course examines the history of the idea and practice of development in twentieth century Africa. Since the 1990s, the US, with some input from other western nations, has had relative hegemony in defining "international development." But this state of affairs was not inevitable – in the 1950s-1970s, decolonizing African nations hosted major debates on how to develop an independent, post-colonial system. Development theorists, academics, and freedom fighters traversed the continent and congregated in intellectual hubs, especially in Tanzania, but also in Nigeria, Mozambique, Senegal, Zambia, and elsewhere, to plan and implement a new world order. This course will combine intellectual and social history: we will explore theories of development, and situate them in their vibrant context.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 3770
class title: Latinos and the United States, 1492-1880
description: In this course, we will answer two major questions: What is Latino history? And how should we write Latino History? We will explore these questions without attempting to cover all of Latino history before 1800. We will focus on a variety of experiences to better understand how differences in race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, and class have shaped Latino communities over time. We will read academic journal articles and books (secondary sources) and documents from the past, such as diaries, letters, court records, and maps (primary sources). Throughout the semester we will be working in groups toward creating a final project: a Latino history website.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 4000
class title: Introduction to Historical Research
description: This seminar is an introduction to the theory, practice, and art of historical research and writing. One key purpose of this course is to prepare students to work on longer research projects—especially an Honors Thesis. We will analyze the relationship between evidence and argument in historical writing; assess the methods and possible biases in various examples of historical writing; identify debates and sources relevant to research problems; think about how to use sources creatively; and discuss the various methodological issues associated with historical inquiry, analysis, and presentation.  This course is required for all students wishing to write an Honors Thesis in their senior year.  It should be taken in either semester of the junior year, or in spring of the sophomore year if you are planning to be abroad in your junior year.  NOTE: you do NOT need to be enrolled in the Honors Program in order to sign up for this course.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4001
class title: Honors Guidance
description: This course provides structure for the student's research and introduces them to research techniques. Enrollment limited to students admitted to the History Department's Honors Program.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HIST 4000.

class: HIST 4168
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 4196
class title: From the Bible to the Museum: Jewish Memory and Public History
description: How has the remembrance of the past shaped the evolution of Jewish religion, identity, and culture from Biblical times to the present? How have the creation, dissemination, and preservation of Jewish memory changed over time? How is Jewish history used in political discourse in contemporary society in the U.S. and around the Globe? How can the historical tools be utilized to generate a sophisticated and discerning public engagement with the complexities of the Jewish past? In this course, students will explore these questions through seminar discussions, attending, evaluating, and critiquing exhibits and cultural events and watching films that put Jewish history on display, and by deploying their own research, writing, and creative skills to produce public facing final projects or a traditional research paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4203
class title: Contesting Votes: Democracy and Citizenship Throughout U.S. History
description: This advanced seminar traces transformations in citizenship and the franchise throughout U.S. history. Through readings, frequent short writings, discussion, and a final paper, the class examines the struggles over who can claim full citizenship and legitimate voice in the political community. It examines the divergent, often clashing, visions of legitimate democratic rule, focusing particularly on the debates over who should vote and on what terms.  We examine the dynamics that have shaped the boundaries of citizenship and hierarchies within it, paying attention to changes in the civic status of Native Americans, property-less white men, paupers, women, African Americans, various immigrant groups, residents of U.S. colonies, felons, and people with intellectual disabilities. A significant portion of the class focuses on debates about U.S. democracy in the decades after the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 4262
class title: Environmental Justice: Past, Present, Future
description: "Environmental Justice" is a relatively recent term, coined in the United States in the 1980s.  It usually refers to a social movement fighting against the unfair concentration of toxic sites within impoverished communities of color.  As a broader set of ideas, though, "environmental justice" has a much longer history, going back at least to the 17th century in England, when poor farmers banded together to prevent common land from being enclosed for the exclusive use of the aristocracy.  This course explores that deep history, examining various overlaps between environmental thought and theories of social justice over the past 400 years in the western world.  It concludes with an examination of the current climate justice movement and a consideration of how environmental justice concerns are being played out in recent works of speculative fiction.  What do we owe to the climate refugees of our present day?  What do we owe to future generations?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4459
class title: History of Book in China
description: One of the pressing concerns for scholars of print culture is how to access the impact of print in the Chinese context. This course will examine the current scholarship on the history of Chinese books within a broader comparative framework of the history of book in general. The readings deal with the impact of print and the growth of book market on the intellectual, social, and political transformation of Chinese society, focusing on the culture and technology of printing as an indispensable condition of textual production, circulation, and reception. By suggesting the history of book not merely as the study of publishing and publishers but as an interdisciplinary approach to combine literary criticism, material culture, and history of the broader social conditions, this seminar aims to provide students an opportunity to conceive their own theoretical framework upon which more specialized research can be built.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4655
class title: Revolution: An Intellectual History
description: For more than two centuries, revolutions have marked the rhythm of modernity. In 1780, the original meaning of revolution - an astronomical rotation - was transformed in order to apprehend a social and political overthrow. This course will investigate the multiple uses of this crucial concept of political theory, from the revolutionary canon (Blanqui, Marx, Fanon...) to the classics of conservatism (Maistre, Cortés, Schmitt...), which depict contemporary history as a conflict between revolutions and counter-revolutions, socialist and fascist revolutions. We will explore the connections between history and theory, and stress the global dimension of revolutions, forged by a permanent transfer of ideas and people from one continent to another.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4667
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: HIST 4673
class title: Vienna and the Birth of the Modern
description: This course takes Vienna's history as a starting point for studying how the modern mind fought to liberate itself from a past deemed overly burdensome, while embracing radical innovation and change. Students will develop a sense of the city's role as a laboratory of twentieth-century ideologies and ideas: liberalism and conservatism, Zionism and anti-Semitism, modernism and traditionalism. Most of the course's key themes will converge on what contemporaries referred to as 'the Jewish question,' a problem which most characters we will examine engaged with to some extent. Assigned readings will include texts by Arthur Schnitzler, Sigmund Freud, Theodor Herzl, Joseph Roth, Robert Musil, and Ludwig Wittgenstein.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4693
class title: Silent No More: Deaf and Disability History in the United States
description: Disabilities, broadly defined, are not exclusively clinical phenomena that belong to the realm of healthcare professionals and rehabilitation specialists. Instead, disability is a lived human experience that is always already embedded in a set of socially constructed ideas that change over time, across cultures, and in relation to race, gender, class and sexuality. Disability is embodied but also discursively constituted, shaped by social injustice and the built environment, and often rendered paradoxically visible and invisible in an ableist and audist world. This seminar explores these complex dynamics and the ways that disability – as an experience and a category of analysis – illuminates new interpretations of major themes and developments in American history like labor, citizenship, immigration, medicine, and activism.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: HIST 4851
class title: Refugees
description: Since World War II, over 4 million people have migrated to the United States as refugees. In this seminar we will examine some of these refugee migrations and the ways these migrations challenged our understanding of the United States as a "haven for the oppressed." We will examine the crafting of refugee/asylum policy, the role of nongovernmental actors in influencing policy, and the ways policy reflected foreign-policy interests and security concerns. The last weeks of the course will pay particular attention to climate refugees and asylum-seekers, and our changing definitions of who 'merits' protection in the United States.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: HIST 6002
class title: Professional Development Seminar
description: This workshop-style course provides a weekly opportunity for graduate students across all the fields of History and related disciplines to learn about different skills and competencies to succeed in graduate school. Some weeks, we will focus on how to do research in archives, taking notes and organizing sources, grant-writing, preparing an article for a journal, applying for jobs, writing a cover letter, compiling a CV and writing an annual report. Students will also have opportunities to practice giving conference presentations, job talks, and participating in video interviews.  The aim is to create a secure space where graduate students learn how to succeed in graduate school.

class: HIST 6006
class title: History Colloquium Series
description: This course is a forum, organized jointly by students and the Director of Graduate Studies, for the reading and discussion of precirculated papers, written mainly by graduate students in the History program. Students registering are expected to attend regularly.

class: HIST 6010
class title: European History Colloquium
description: A research colloquium designed for European history graduate students. The colloquium will offer a forum for students to present papers and to discuss the work of Europeanists at Cornell as well as visiting scholars.

class: HIST 6132
class title: Mobility, Circulation, Migration, Diaspora: Global Connections
description: This graduate seminar seeks to familiarize students with some of the most recent takes on transnational history that have emphasized the experiences of individuals and groups whose lives were affected by mobility across political boundaries. An explicit aim of the seminar is to use these border-crossing lives as a way to develop a critique of conventional areas studies frameworks and to explore the possibilities of imagining (geographically and otherwise) a different world (or multiple different ways of organizing global space). Since most of the readings will concentrate on the pre-nineteenth century world, the seminar will also offer students tools to rethink conventional narratives of the rise of a globalized world that tend to emphasize the second half of the nineteenth century as the birth of the global world. Globalization, this course will demonstrate, was happening long before most accepted narratives assert.

class: HIST 6168
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.

class: HIST 6190
class title: Seminar in the History of Technology
description: Graduate-level survey of the history of technology, which introduces some key questions, concepts, and approaches within the field since the 1980s. Typical themes include social construction of technology; technological systems and infrastructure; technopolitics; race, class, genders, disability, and technology; users; envirotech; maintenance and repair; colonialism and decolonizing technology; and public and engaged #histtech.

class: HIST 6378
class title: Key Texts in European Cultural-Intellectual History
description: This graduate seminar focuses on some of the key texts to have set the contours of modern historical research. Readings will include works by Arendt, Bakhtin, Benjamin, Bourdieu, Burckhardt, Foucault, Koselleck, and more. The course is intended especially for students focusing on European cultural-intellectual history, but open to all graduate students interested in historical thought and method.

class: HIST 6452
class title: Dress, Cloth and Identity in Africa and the Diaspora
description: This course uses a multi-disciplinary approach to examine the importance of textiles in African social and economic history and the long engagement between African consumers and textile producers from other world regions.  It combines art history, anthropology as well as social and economic history to explore the role of textiles and dress in marking status, gender, political authority and ethnicity.  In addition, we examine the production and distribution of indigenous and imported cloth as well as the consequences of colonial rule and contemporary globalization on African textile industries and consumers. Our analysis also considers the principles of African aesthetics and dress that continue to shape the African diaspora in the Americas.

class: HIST 6571
class title: American Defense Policy and Military History from the Two World Wars to the Global War on Terror
description: America is finishing up two wars, one in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. They have been the longest wars in American history and have ended amid much ambivalence about the US engagement in each place and the results. They are part of a series of wars that America has fought as a global power, with a global reach, sending its forces thousands of miles from home. That global reach is not new, and goes back all the way to 1898 and the Spanish-American War. This course will look at the American military experience from our first tentative steps onto the global stage in 1898, to the earth-spanning conflicts of World War I and II, to the nuclear tension of Cold War conflicts, and finish with the current Long War against terrorism, and the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.

class: HIST 6655
class title: Revolution: An Intellectual History
description: For more than two centuries, revolutions have marked the rhythm of modernity. In 1780, the original meaning of revolution - an astronomical rotation - was transformed in order to apprehend a social and political overthrow. This course will investigate the multiple uses of this crucial concept of political theory, from the revolutionary canon (Blanqui, Marx, Fanon...) to the classics of conservatism (Maistre, Cortés, Schmitt...), which depict contemporary history as a conflict between revolutions and counter-revolutions, socialist and fascist revolutions. We will explore the connections between history and theory, and stress the global dimension of revolutions, forged by a permanent transfer of ideas and people from one continent to another.

class: HIST 6659
class title: History of Book in China
description: One of the pressing concerns for scholars of print culture is how to access the impact of print in the Chinese context. This course will examine the current scholarship on the history of Chinese books within a broader comparative framework of the history of book in general. The readings deal with the impact of print and the growth of book market on the intellectual, social, and political transformation of Chinese society, focusing on the culture and technology of printing as an indispensable condition of textual production, circulation, and reception. By suggesting the history of book not merely as the study of publishing and publishers but as an interdisciplinary approach to combine literary criticism, material culture, and history of the broader social conditions, this seminar aims to provide students an opportunity to conceive their own theoretical framework upon which more specialized research can be built.

class: HIST 6667
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.

class: HIST 6673
class title: Vienna and the Birth of the Modern
description: This course takes Vienna's history as a starting point for studying how the modern mind fought to liberate itself from a past deemed overly burdensome, while embracing radical innovation and change. Students will develop a sense of the city's role as a laboratory of twentieth-century ideologies and ideas: liberalism and conservatism, Zionism and anti-Semitism, modernism and traditionalism. Most of the course's key themes will converge on what contemporaries referred to as 'the Jewish question,' a problem which most characters we will examine engaged with to some extent. Assigned readings will include texts by Arthur Schnitzler, Sigmund Freud, Theodor Herzl, Joseph Roth, Robert Musil, and Ludwig Wittgenstein.

class: HIST 6693
class title: Silent No More: Deaf and Disability History in the United States
description: Disabilities, broadly defined, are not exclusively clinical phenomena that belong to the realm of healthcare professionals and rehabilitation specialists. Instead, disability is a lived human experience that is always already embedded in a set of socially constructed ideas that change over time, across cultures, and in relation to race, gender, class and sexuality. Disability is embodied but also discursively constituted, shaped by social injustice and the built environment, and often rendered paradoxically visible and invisible in an ableist and audist world. This seminar explores these complex dynamics and the ways that disability – as an experience and a category of analysis – illuminates new interpretations of major themes and developments in American history like labor, citizenship, immigration, medicine, and activism.

class: HIST 6851
class title: Refugees
description: Since World War II, over 4 million people have migrated to the United States as refugees. In this seminar we will examine some of these refugee migrations and the ways these migrations challenged our understanding of the United States as a "haven for the oppressed." We will examine the crafting of refugee/asylum policy, the role of nongovernmental actors in influencing policy, and the ways policy reflected foreign-policy interests and security concerns. The last weeks of the course will pay particular attention to climate refugees and asylum-seekers, and our changing definitions of who 'merits' protection in the United States.

class: HIST 7090
class title: Introduction to the Graduate Study of History
description: This course is designed to introduce entering graduate students to crucial issues and problems in historical methodology that cut across various areas of specialization.

class: HIST 7110
class title: Introduction to Science and Technology Studies
description: Provides students with a foundation in the field of science and technology studies. Using classic works as well as contemporary exemplars, seminar participants chart the terrain of this new field. Topics for discussion include, but are not limited to, historiography of science and technology and their relation to social studies of science and technology, laboratory studies, intellectual property, science and the state, the role of instruments, fieldwork, politics and technical knowledge, philosophy of science, sociological studies of science and technology, and popularization.

class: HIST 7937
class title: Proseminar in Peace Studies
description: The Proseminar in Peace Studies offers a multidisciplinary review of issues related to peace and conflict at the graduate level. The course is led by the director of the Judith Reppy Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies and is based on the Institute's weekly seminar series, featuring outside visitors and Cornell faculty. 

class: HIST 8004
class title: Supervised Reading
description: Independent Study based supervised reading with a history faculty/field member.

class: HIST 8010
class title: Independent Study-PIRIP
description: Independent Study based supervised reading with a history faculty/field member.

class: HUNGR 1131
class title: Elementary Hungarian I
description: In Elementary Hungarian I you will learn four communicative skills of comprehension, speaking, and writing.  During the first semester you will learn to communicate through dialogues about hobbies, where you live, what languages you speak and study, telling time, shopping, what you have, your family.  You will learn to make hotel and restaurant arrangements, describe your friends, family, and environment, discuss interests and more. You will learn at least 13 cases, two verb conjugations for the present tense, verbal prefixes, how to form plurals, adverbs, adjectives, and to express possession and the future. You will learn a lot of grammar and learn to use it frequently and creatively through a variety of conversational environments. You will read dialogues and short texts at every class and will write dialogues and descriptive texts of your own.  You will also learn about Hungarian culture so that you become both grammatically and social correct.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: HUNGR 1133
class title: Continuing Hungarian I
description: In Intermediate Hungarian I you will continue to build upon your knowledge of speaking, listening and writing in Hungarian. During the first semester you will complete the textbook and take a first glimpse into Hungarian poetry and some short stories. You will learn how to find and furnish an apartment, express love, take part in a Hungarian-style barbecue, make comparisons, and learn to get others to do things for you. We will finish the semester with the reading of a short crime story. Through conversation you will continue to practice requests and commands, future plans and past experiences, and hypothetical situations.  Your readings will explore some of the more playful aspects of Hungarian word-building as well as introduce you to the particularly Hungarian (political/cultural) humor found in the tradition of the "one-minute" short story.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HUNGR 1132 or permission of instructor.

class: HUNGR 2103
class title: Advanced Hungarian I
description: This course aims to serve as both a review of the more advanced grammatical constructions of Hungarian and a brief chronological look at 20th century Hungarian literature.  We will read short stories, poetry and book chapters that reflect the political, economic, literary, and every-day trends and disturbances of the time.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HUNGR 1134 or equivalent.

class: ILRGL 1100
class title: Introduction to U.S. Labor History
description: Introductory survey covering the major changes in the nature of work, the workforce, and the institutions involved in industrial relations from the late 19th century to the present.
outcome: Students will develop a firm understanding of some of the major historical themes and general discourses shaping U.S. labor relations throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries., Students will learn to examine the sources and consequences of change in labor relations over time within the context of the broader patterns and issues of American political, social and economic history., Students will learn to think about work, class, and the economy as fluid concepts that are shaped by diverse perspectives and interests, and influenced by race, gender, and national identity., Students will learn to evaluate the evolving actions of workers, labor unions, employers, and the American public to establish government policies for regulating labor relations., Students will develop key methodological and analytical tools for historical research and writing in a clear and critical manner., 

class: ILRGL 1200
class title: Introduction to Disability Studies
description: This course provides an introduction to the field of Disability Studies, in both an academic and applied context, and will examine the issues that affect the inclusion and integration of people with disabilities in the U.S., including: the history and impact of medical and social attitudes toward disability; the legacy and future of the disability rights movement; disability policy and laws, and their effects on workplace, technological, and physical environments; representations of disability in mass media; access to education and employment; and contemporary national efforts to expand the rights and to promote the inclusion of people with disabilities in the workplace, educational domain, and everyday society.​

class: ILRGL 2010
class title: Labor and Employment Law
description: Survey and analysis of the law governing labor relations and employee rights in the workplace. Half of the course examines the legal framework in which collective bargaining takes place, including union organizational campaigns, negotiations for and enforcement of collective bargaining agreements, and the use of economic pressure. The other half surveys the laws against discrimination based on race, religion, sex, national origin, age, and disability. Also serves as an introduction to judicial and administrative systems.
outcome: This course aims to familiarize students with the underlying themes of labor and employment law, to provide students with some of the skills of analytical thinking, and to improve students' communication of ideas in speech and in writing., 

class: ILRGL 2050
class title: Labor Relations
description: A comprehensive introduction to the labor relations systems of the United States and other countries. Covers the determinants of bargaining power, the process of labor agreement negotiation and administration, and assessment of the effects that collective representation exerts on economic and social outcomes. Special consideration is given to the increasing importance of new technology and international factors including global supply chains.
outcome: Contrast the theoretical perspectives of labor and employment relations., Analyze the sources of union and management bargaining power., Understand the influence of economic, social, and political pressures on labor and employment relations., Evaluate the efficacy of current labor laws., Experience the analytical, emotional, and cognitive aspects of bargaining a collective agreement., Understand the dynamics of negotiations and conflict resolution., Assess evidence regarding the impact of collective bargaining on workplace and societal outcomes., Debate effectively the role and effects of unions in the public and private sectors., 

class: ILRGL 2210
class title: Socio-Legal Perspectives on Disability
description: This sophomore writing seminar engages in a critical, in-depth study of the way in which people with disabilities and the disability experience are represented in an array of interdisciplinary texts, with particular emphasis on the legal tradition and interpretations. Drawing from a variety of historical as well as contemporary texts and documents, we will explore the implications of disability in culture and policy, particularly as they impact ideas of citizenship and rights, primarily in the United States, but also globally.  We will examine the history of disability law, looking closely at a number of Supreme Court cases and decisions. We will additionally allow for an intensive focus on the development of critical thought and reasoning in both oral and written communication.

class: ILRGL 2280
class title: Social Policy in the Global South
description: This course offers an overview of the structure and politics of social policy in the Global South. It addresses commonalities and differences in social policies across middle-income countries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia, and examines scholarly explanations for social policy adoption, policy design, and social policy change. The course's approach is comparative, focusing on different regions and country cases in the Global South, but pays special attention to the evolution of social protection in Latin America, where welfare systems are relatively broader in scope and have been the subject of more scholarly research. The course explores the types of protections states extend to different groups, particularly focusing on the divide between insiders—meaning formal-sector workers with labor contracts—and outsiders—informal, unemployed, and rural workers. It also examines the political dynamics (electoral competition, protest), institutions (e.g. political regimes), and actors (social and labor movements, political parties) that shape social policy. Finally, it explores the role of policy legacies, ideas, and economic factors in shaping social protection in the Global South.

class: ILRGL 2290
class title: Labor and Democracy in Latin America
description: Labor movements are crucial actors in Latin American politics. This course will analyze and explain the contributions of organized labor to democratization processes in Latin America from the 19th century to the present—not only in the struggle for formal democracy, but also in the creation of new forms of participation and in the expansion of social citizenship rights. Special attention will be given to the role of labor in shaping the major political eras in the region, including the rise of populism following the onset of mass politics, the period of redemocratization in the late 20th century, and the more recent political shift towards the left. The course will cover a wide range of countries in the region and different labor movements in different historical periods. It will draw on political economy and political sociology approaches to explain both general processes and differences across countries.

class: ILRGL 2350
class title: Work, Labor, and Capital in the Global Economy
description: Provides an introduction to how globalization is changing the nature of work, labor, and capital. It examines both contemporary and historical debates about globalization, but also covers a number of interrelated issues, including the regulation of labor standards, the mobility of capital, the rise of global production systems, international labor, and responses to globalization. Lectures and discussion for the topics mentioned above will be grounded in the experiences of different countries, firms, workplaces, industrial sectors, and individuals.

class: ILRGL 2580
class title: Six Pretty Good Books: Explorations in Social Science
description: This course is modeled after "Great Books" literature courses in the humanities, but with two important differences: we read non-fiction books in the social sciences rather than the humanities, written by highly prominent contemporary social scientists. The course title refers to the fact that the books are new, hence their potential greatness has yet to be confirmed by the test of time. We choose living authors to give students a unique opportunity: to interact with each of the six authors in Q&amp;A sessions via live or recorded video conferencing. 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: ILRGL 3020
class title: Strangers and Citizens: Immigration and Labor in U.S. History
description: Explores immigrant workers' experiences in the 19th and 20th centuries from different perspectives. Students examine what it meant to the immigrants themselves to arrive as strangers in the United States and the ways in which preexisting American groups defined these immigrants as "strangers." Similarly, students look at U.S. citizens in their roles as greeters of immigrants, detractors of immigrants, and as models for the aspirations of immigrants. The main examples are taken from the industrial and union realms.

class: ILRGL 3035
class title: Special Topics in Labor Relations
description: Undergraduate seminar whose topic changes depending on semester and instructor.

class: ILRGL 3055
class title: Rhetoric of the Labor Movement
description: This course equips students to use different modes of rhetorical analysis to examine historical and contemporary artifacts in critical ways.  Grading is based on class participation, tests and a final paper.  The final paper requires students to identify primary source materials with a connection to either past or present labor movements and apply one or more of these modes of rhetorical criticism as the basis of an unique investigation into a particular labor movement's significant symbolic acts.  Students will be expected to hone their own teaching and public speaking skills by giving at least one major in class presentation.

class: ILRGL 3057
class title: Environmental Mediation and Negotiation
description: This course is designed to explore environmental conflict resolution. The course will build on existing student knowledge of theories of dispute resolution and explore application of these concepts to the field of environmental and natural resource conflicts. The course will begin with a review of fundamental concepts of interest-based negotiation, mediation and other general dispute resolution techniques applicable to complex, multi-party environmental conflicts. Students will then be introduced to the architecture of several environmental statutes and the manner in which these obligations are enforced by the federal and state governments and private parties. An investigation of several natural resource conflicts will conclude the class. The goal of the class will be to expose students to the breadth of disputes to which alternative dispute resolution is now being used in environmental conflicts and to be able to compare and contrast the styles of mediation used in these matters. Students will learn how these principles are applied in real environmental situations. A key objective of the course is to enable students to both understand and think critically about the strengths and weaknesses of using alternative dispute resolution procedures to manage environmental conflicts.

class: ILRGL 3300
class title: Advocacy and Debate
description: Students learn the principles of argumentation and debate. Topics emphasize Internet database research, synthesis of collected data, policy analysis, evidentiary quality, refutation of counter claims, identification of logical fallacies, risk evaluation, framing of issues, and coherent storytelling. Prepares students to work with a great range of opinion and evidence. Emphasizes different viewpoints, including those of different cultures. Assumptions are interrogated.
distribution categories: (ORL-AG)

class: ILRGL 3315
class title: Gender at Work in U.S. History
description: This course examines the relationships between gender, work, and public policy in U.S. history from the nineteenth century to the present. How has work been organized along gendered lines, both at the workplace and at home? Why have women been historically overrepresented in precarious, low-paying jobs? How have labor unions dealt with issues of gender inequality, and to what extent has U.S. labor law challenged or reinforced this form of inequality? By exploring these questions, this course uncovers how gender has influenced, and been influenced by, the experiences and politics of work in U.S. history.

class: ILRGL 3330
class title: Research Methods for Labor Policy
description: This course is designed to provide an in-depth understanding of the concepts, tools, methodologies, and resources pivotal to the strategic and effective utilization of qualitative and quantitative data. The course structure is organized around a series of modules, each focusing on distinct analytical methodologies and their potential applications to modern challenges in labor relations. These modules include qualitative, quantitative, and AI-based (e.g.., machine learning) research methods. The course's pedagogical approach encourages the practical application of course concepts through hands-on exercises and assignments, enabling students to integrate and contextualize the course content within actual research questions.

class: ILRGL 3557
class title: Exceptionalism Questioned: America and Europe
description: Do you want to learn the discussion-based case method as taught at the Harvard Business School? Do you want to learn how to write a long research paper? Do you not want to take a final examination? If so this course may be for you. Since the beginning of the republic, American intellectuals, politicians and businessmen have extolled the exceptionalism of America. In a world of diverse forms of capitalism, can this view be sustained? Is America a shining city on the hill or a darkened city in the valley? Comparison is an effective way to discern and assess what is unique and what is general in the distinctive form of America's capitalist democracy. In this course the liberal market economy of the United States with its distinctive strengths and weaknesses is put side-by-side with different forms of liberal, corporatist and statist market economies that characterize different European countries in the emerging European polity. The diversity of capitalism points to one overarching conclusion: all of these countries are arguably capitalist, democratic market economies belonging to "the West;" and each of them has distinctive strengths and weaknesses. Like all other countries, America is ordinary in mobilizing its formidable capacities and displaying its glaring weaknesses as it copes with change. 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ILRGL 3810
class title: Migration: Histories, Controversies, and Perspectives
description: This introductory course introduces students to issues and debates related to international migration and will provide an interdisciplinary foundation to understanding the factors that shape migration flows and migrant experiences. We will start by reviewing theories of the state and historical examples of immigrant racialization and exclusion in the United States and beyond. We will critically examine the notions of borders, citizenship/non-citizenship, and the creation of diasporas. Students will also hear a range of perspectives by exposing them to Cornell guest faculty who do research and teach on migration across different disciplines and methodologies and in different world areas. Examples include demographic researchers concerned with immigrant inequality and family formation, geographic perspectives on the changing landscapes of immigrant metropolises, legal scholarship on the rights of immigrant workers, and the study of immigrant culture from a feminist studies lens. Offered each fall semester.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: ILRGL 3815
class title: The Welfare State and Its Contradictions for Workers
description: Is the welfare state a protector from capitalism or an accomplice to capitalism? Social safety nets and capitalist markets have a complicated relationship for workers. Healthcare, retirement pensions, unemployment insurance — these provisions protect workers from the risks of getting sick, old, and fired. These same provisions are also tremendous sources of capital, invested into the very employers and asset-managers who pose risks to workers. This contradiction is not an "American thing," but extends to social democracies like the Netherlands who steward one of the largest national capital-funded pensions. This course uncovers these complexities of the welfare state, with special theoretical and empirical attention to labor. Geographically it will focus on the United States, with frequent international comparisons to examine the commonalities and differences of welfare states. And lastly, it will be equal parts sociology and history, illuminating the origins, transformations, and inequalities of the welfare state in the United States.

class: ILRGL 3825
class title: Southern West Virginia's Coal Fields - Ancient Struggles Amidst Hopeful Dreams
description: This course will critically analyze the labor, political, racial and environmental struggles that have characterized the shaping of the coalfields of Southern West Virginia and to some extent, other Appalachian coalfields. Why for 130 years have so many families embraced and fought against King Coal? What has been the role of the Mine Workers union (UMWA) in shaping hope in the region? How big of a deal is religion? Race? Geography? What comprises Life in these regions of America? Attendance and participation mandatory. 

class: ILRGL 3875
class title: Public Sector Labor Law and CB: The Turbulence Amidst Police, Policing, Teachers and Their Unions
description: The turbulence amidst police, policing, teachers and their unions. By using policy articles and certain legal cases this course seeks to show how and why certain public employees and their unions have come under such intense scrutiny by the Right and the Left. We will deconstruct how laws and workplace bargaining have gained, police and their unions, these rights and whether police and/or or teachers might have too many rights. Have the police's and teachers' ability to seemingly avoid the accountability that parts of our society are demanding occurred due to disproportionate political power? And how powerful are they?                                     

class: ILRGL 4022
class title: Arbitration in the Workplace: Theory and Practice
description: Study of arbitration in the field of labor-management relations, including an analysis of principles and practices, the law of arbitration, the handling of materials in briefs and oral presentations, the conduct of mock arbitration hearing, and the preparation of arbitration opinions and post-hearing briefs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRGL 2010 and ILRGL 2050.

class: ILRGL 4027
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum
description: This course is offered to students interested in acquiring the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate campus disputes.
 
In the first segment of the course, students will be introduced to the guiding principles of mediation and restorative conferencing. A review of the theories of conflict, its roots and its resolution, set the stage for the role mediation and restorative conferencing can effectively play in resolving conflict.  Students are introduced to the models of mediation and the benefits and challenges of each, including a comparative analysis of evaluative, facilitative, transformative, and restorative justice styles of mediation. 
 
In the second segment, students will be assigned to mediate and facilitate cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards, as well as other campus partners.  The role of gender, race, culture, ethics and impasse in mediation will all be examined and incorporated into simulations and case studies.  
 
One full credit of this course will be dedicated to restorative justice and mediation experience outside of the classroom. Students will have several opportunities to apply their knowledge of mediation and restorative justice to acquire the skills necessary to become effective mediators and facilitators through on-campus student-based mediations and restorative processes. Following each case assignment, students will be required to provide a reflection and class presentation analyzing the nature of the complaint, the approach and techniques employed during the case and the student's evaluation of what worked and did not work in their attempt to resolve the conflict. Oversight will be provided by the course instructor.

class: ILRGL 4029
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum II: Advanced Issues in Restorative Justice
description: This course is offered to students interested in furthering their knowledge of the principles and practices of restorative justice. Students will also acquire the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate complex campus disputes. The course considers the needs and roles of key stakeholders (victims, offenders, communities, justice systems) and explores in depth the principles and values of restorative justice. It also identifies challenges to restorative justice - the dangers, the pitfalls – as well as possible strategies to help prevent restorative justice from failing to live up to its promise. Much of the course is organized around the issue of harm and crime within our legal system. However, students will also be exposed to restorative justice in multiple contexts, including issues in higher education.
outcome: Students will build on the knowledge gained in Campus Mediation Practicum I which sets the stage for the role restorative justice can effectively play in resolving conflict in multiple settings and environments., Students will be assigned to mentor CMP I student mediators as well as mediate complex cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of the Judicial Administrator and referrals from other Cornell University offices., Students will conduct research and write a paper exploring the global use of restorative justice programs in a wide variety of contexts., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRGL 4027.

class: ILRGL 4325
class title: The European Social Model
description: This course examines the past and future of the "European Social Model." Europe has long been known for its strong labor unions and social regulation of labor markets. We will ask to what extent these traditions have been maintained or transformed in the face of market liberalization and integration within the European Union. The class is organized in three parts. In part one, we will discuss major 'national models', including Germany, the Nordic countries, and France – reviewing both the history of these models and recent changes in collective bargaining and labor market institutions. In part two, we will compare major areas of labor market policy across European countries, including pay, parental leave, gender quotas, employment protection, and working time flexibility. In part three, we will examine the process and politics of European integration in the European Union (EU), including extension into Central and Eastern European countries and migration within Europe. The class will conclude with a discussion of challenges facing the EU: support for far right parties; responses to the climate crisis; and geopolitical conflict.

class: ILRGL 4330
class title: Politics of the Global North
description: From a perspective based on comparative political economy, this course examines pressing contemporary issues such as the politics of growing inequality.  We consider conflicts around markets, democracy, economic and social justice, including the efforts of actors such as governments and labor unions aimed at economic recovery, reducing inequality, and the reform of national and global economic policy and institutions.  We also look at distinctive types of political and economic organization, especially in Europe and the United States, and the capacities of these societies to meet current economic, political, and social challenges, both domestic and international.

class: ILRGL 4347
class title: Race, Inequality, and Labor: A Global Perspective
description: This course examines popular constructions of "race" and how they inform labor and inequality in a variety of national contexts. Assigned course materials deal with the national history out of which contemporary understandings of race arise as well as power dynamics reflected in the maintenance and/or transformation of racial categories and how those power dynamics affect the nature of work, labor markets, and the distribution of social and economic resources. Some of the core questions addressed during this course are: How have racial categories and understandings about race changed over time? What are the common aspects of race and racial formation that cut across the selected nations? How are labor markets and occupations shaped and informed by race?

class: ILRGL 4360
class title: Global Comparative Disability Policy
description: How do different nations implement policies that increase the labor market participation and economic security of people with disabilities? National frameworks vary in terms of the breadth of anti-discrimination requirements, as well as the rehabilitation and social services available to enhance labor market outcomes. Even with landmark human rights efforts like the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2008), many countries do not have robust frameworks for promoting substantive disability equality. One study found that among U.N. Member States, 27% did not explicitly define the term "disability" in their laws, 30% had no legal provisions for reasonable accommodations, and 51% had no specific legal protections for employment discrimination on health grounds.

class: ILRGL 4367
class title: Migration and Mobility: Theories and Lived Realities
description: This course will provide the student with an understanding of both classic and contemporary research and perspectives on migration and mobility, with special attention to how both inform labor market outcomes. Major topics of concern are how migration intersects with issues of law, race and ethnicity, gender and sexuality, education, employment discrimination, health, and social networks. Although course content will primarily focus on issues of migration impacting the United States, we will also consider contemporary migration issues of importance in other areas of the world.

class: ILRGL 4377
class title: Issues in South Asian Studies
description: This is an events-based course. Students will attend ten seminars in the South Asia Program seminar series. The work of scholars, filmmakers, and artists presenting research in the series spans the region and its diasporas (e.g., India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Bhutan, and Indian Ocean worlds). Topics considered will cross the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Students will attend these events and engage with the material presented in short response papers and supplemental readings. The objective of this course is to offer students, whether they are familiar with the region or not, new perspectives on the lived experiences of South Asia. Students will also become familiar with interdisciplinary area studies as an intellectual project.

class: ILRGL 4533
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.
distribution categories: (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ILRGL 4580
class title: The Science of Social Behavior
description: This is a capstone seminar for seniors who are interested in graduate or professional study in scientific disciplines that focus on human behavior and social interaction. The intent is to provide seniors with an opportunity to summon, integrate, and apply insights that they have acquired over the course of their undergraduate education, and give prospective graduate students the opportunity to lead discussions in a large introductory lecture course, "Six Pretty Good Books". Each seminar member is part of a two or three-person team that leads the discussion together, under the supervision of a graduate teaching assistant. Seminar meetings are devoted to building lesson plans for leading an effective discussion of each of the six books. The authors vary from year to year but include Malcolm Gladwell, Michelle Alexander, Nate Silver, and Nicholas Christakis. All authors have agreed to participate in a "Q&amp;A" session with the students which seminar members are required to attend.

class: ILRGL 4820
class title: Ethics at Work
description: Examines major theories of ethics, then applies them to issues in the employment relationship such as genetic screening of job applicants, random drug testing of employees, affirmative action, discipline for off-duty conduct, whistle-blowing, worker safety and cost/benefit analysis, comparable worth, strikes by employees providing crucial services, and crossing a picket line.

class: ILRGL 4865
class title: Thwarting the Dream of Brown v. Board of Education
description: This course will review first the 19th and early 20th century US Supreme Court cases to understand how the Government created segregation in America. The first 80 years saw a number of twists and turns, including Brown in 1954. However, the institutional forces and structured momentum created by America's zoning, housing, banking, lending laws and other governmental policies continued to push America into an actual physical segregated landscape that our schools then and now reflect. These developments were certified by a series of US Supreme Courts and state governmental taxation and legal policies that assisted in creating the current state of educational affairs in the US.

class: ILRGL 4870
class title: Introduction to Labor Research
description: Provides students interested in the labor field with the skills necessary to understand and use social science research as it relates to the labor movement. The course's four major goals are to (1) develop the skills to critically evaluate a wide variety of research relating to unions and the workplace; (2) introduce a number of quantitative and qualitative research techniques used by unions and those who study the labor movement; (3) familiarize students with the broad range of library and computer resources that can be used for labor and corporate research; and (4) provide students with an opportunity to design and conduct a research project for a national or local union.

class: ILRGL 4885
class title: In The Shadow of the Tower: Building A Dynamic Local Union At Cornell
description: Against great odds, 1,000 low-paid custodians, cooks, bus drivers, animal attendants, and groundskeepers succeeded in organizing a local union at Cornell. This course examines the experience of building a dynamic local union by using the creation and development of Local 2300 UAW at Cornell University as a case study. The history is shared from the grassroots perspective of the service and maintenance staff, and rank and file leadership who organized, bargained, went on strike, and built powerful community coalitions. Students will explore and discuss the primary stages of local union development. We will examine the dilemmas and strategic choices facing worker activists as they progress from unorganized powerlessness and poverty to having collective agency and impact. Additional case studies of innovative union organizing and bargaining campaigns will be introduced for purposes of comparison with aspects of the Cornell UAW history.

class: ILRGL 5000
class title: Labor Relations
description: A comprehensive introduction to the labor relations systems of the United States and other countries. Covers the determinants of bargaining power, the process of labor agreement negotiation and administration, and assessment of the effects that collective representation exerts on economic and social outcomes. Special consideration is given to the increasing importance of new technology and international factors including global supply chains.
outcome: Understand the influence of economic, social, and political pressures on labor and employment relations., Evaluate the efficacy of current labor laws., Experience the analytical, emotional, and cognitive aspects of bargaining a collective agreement., Understand the dynamics of negotiations and conflict resolution., Assess evidence regarding the impact of collective bargaining on workplace and societal outcomes., Debate effectively the role and effects of unions in the public and private sectors., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite or corequisite: ILRGL 5010.

class: ILRGL 5030
class title: Research Methods for Labor Policy
description: This course is designed to provide an in-depth understanding of the concepts, tools, methodologies, and resources pivotal to the strategic and effective utilization of qualitative and quantitative data. The course structure is organized around a series of modules, each focusing on distinct analytical methodologies and their potential applications to modern challenges in labor relations. These modules include qualitative, quantitative, and AI-based (e.g.., machine learning) research methods. The course's pedagogical approach encourages the practical application of course concepts through hands-on exercises and assignments, enabling students to integrate and contextualize the course content within actual research questions.

class: ILRGL 5815
class title: The Welfare State and Its Contradictions for Workers
description: Is the welfare state a protector from capitalism or an accomplice to capitalism? Social safety nets and capitalist markets have a complicated relationship for workers. Healthcare, retirement pensions, unemployment insurance — these provisions protect workers from the risks of getting sick, old, and fired. These same provisions are also tremendous sources of capital, invested into the very employers and asset-managers who pose risks to workers. This contradiction is not an "American thing," but extends to social democracies like the Netherlands who steward one of the largest national capital-funded pensions. This course uncovers these complexities of the welfare state, with special theoretical and empirical attention to labor. Geographically it will focus on the United States, with frequent international comparisons to examine the commonalities and differences of welfare states. And lastly, it will be equal parts sociology and history, illuminating the origins, transformations, and inequalities of the welfare state in the United States.

class: ILRGL 6022
class title: Arbitration in the Workplace: Theory and Practice
description: Study of arbitration in the field of labor-management relations, including an analysis of principles and practices, the law of arbitration, the handling of materials in briefs and oral presentations, the conduct of mock arbitration hearing, and the preparation of arbitration opinions and post-hearing briefs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRGL 5000 and ILRGL 5010.

class: ILRGL 6027
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum
description: This course is offered to students interested in acquiring the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate campus disputes.
 
In the first segment of the course, students will be introduced to the guiding principles of mediation and restorative conferencing. A review of the theories of conflict, its roots and its resolution, set the stage for the role mediation and restorative conferencing can effectively play in resolving conflict.  Students are introduced to the models of mediation and the benefits and challenges of each, including a comparative analysis of evaluative, facilitative, transformative, and restorative justice styles of mediation. 
 
In the second segment, students will be assigned to mediate and facilitate cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards, as well as other campus partners.  The role of gender, race, culture, ethics and impasse in mediation will all be examined and incorporated into simulations and case studies.  
 
One full credit of this course will be dedicated to restorative justice and mediation experience outside of the classroom. Students will have several opportunities to apply their knowledge of mediation and restorative justice to acquire the skills necessary to become effective mediators and facilitators through on-campus student-based mediations and restorative processes. Following each case assignment, students will be required to provide a reflection and class presentation analyzing the nature of the complaint, the approach and techniques employed during the case and the student's evaluation of what worked and did not work in their attempt to resolve the conflict. Oversight will be provided by the course instructor.

class: ILRGL 6029
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum II: Advanced Issues in Restorative Justice
description: This course is offered to students interested in furthering their knowledge of the principles and practices of restorative justice. Students will also acquire the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate complex campus disputes. The course considers the needs and roles of key stakeholders (victims, offenders, communities, justice systems) and explores in depth the principles and values of restorative justice. It also identifies challenges to restorative justice - the dangers, the pitfalls – as well as possible strategies to help prevent restorative justice from failing to live up to its promise. Much of the course is organized around the issue of harm and crime within our legal system. However, students will also be exposed to restorative justice in multiple contexts, including issues in higher education.
outcome: Students will build on the knowledge gained in Campus Mediation Practicum I which sets the stage for the role restorative justice can effectively play in resolving conflict in multiple settings and environments., Students will be assigned to mentor CMP I student mediators as well as mediate complex cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of the Judicial Administrator and referrals from other Cornell University offices., Students will conduct research and write a paper exploring the global use of restorative justice programs in a wide variety of contexts., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRGL 6027/LAW 6027.

class: ILRGL 6057
class title: Environmental Mediation and Negotiation
description: This course is designed to explore environmental conflict resolution. The course will build on existing student knowledge of theories of dispute resolution and explore application of these concepts to the field of environmental and natural resource conflicts. The course will begin with a review of fundamental concepts of interest-based negotiation, mediation and other general dispute resolution techniques applicable to complex, multi-party environmental conflicts. Students will then be introduced to the architecture of several environmental statutes and the manner in which these obligations are enforced by the federal and state governments and private parties. An investigation of several natural resource conflicts will conclude the class. The goal of the class will be to expose students to the breadth of disputes to which alternative dispute resolution is now being used in environmental conflicts and to be able to compare and contrast the styles of mediation used in these matters. Students will learn how these principles are applied in real environmental situations. A key objective of the course is to enable students to both understand and think critically about the strengths and weaknesses of using alternative dispute resolution procedures to manage environmental conflicts.

class: ILRGL 6080
class title: Special Topics in Labor Relations
description: Topics change depending on semester and instructor.

class: ILRGL 6300
class title: Advocacy and Debate
description: Students learn the principles of argumentation and debate. Topics emphasize Internet database research, synthesis of collected data, policy analysis, evidentiary quality, refutation of counter claims, identification of logical fallacies, risk evaluation, framing of issues, and coherent storytelling.  Prepares students to work with a great range of opinion and evidence.   
Emphasizes different viewpoints, including those of different cultures.  Assumptions are interrogated. 

class: ILRGL 6325
class title: The European Social Model
description: This course examines the past and future of the "European Social Model." Europe has long been known for its strong labor unions and social regulation of labor markets. We will ask to what extent these traditions have been maintained or transformed in the face of market liberalization and integration within the European Union. The class is organized in three parts. In part one, we will discuss major 'national models', including Germany, the Nordic countries, and France – reviewing both the history of these models and recent changes in collective bargaining and labor market institutions. In part two, we will compare major areas of labor market policy across European countries, including pay, parental leave, gender quotas, employment protection, and working time flexibility. In part three, we will examine the process and politics of European integration in the European Union (EU), including extension into Central and Eastern European countries and migration within Europe. The class will conclude with a discussion of challenges facing the EU: support for far right parties; responses to the climate crisis; and geopolitical conflict.

class: ILRGL 6347
class title: Race, Inequality, and Labor: A Global Perspective
description: This course examines popular constructions of "race" and how they inform labor and inequality in a variety of national contexts. Assigned course materials deal with the national history out of which contemporary understandings of race arise as well as power dynamics reflected in the maintenance and/or transformation of racial categories and how those power dynamics affect the nature of work, labor markets, and the distribution of social and economic resources. Some of the core questions addressed during this course are: How have racial categories and understandings about race changed over time? What are the common aspects of race and racial formation that cut across the selected nations? How are labor markets and occupations shaped and informed by race?

class: ILRGL 6367
class title: Migration and Mobility: Theories and Lived Realities
description: This course will provide the student with an understanding of both classic and contemporary research and perspectives on migration and mobility, with special attention to how both inform labor market outcomes. Major topics of concern are how migration intersects with issues of law, race and ethnicity, gender and sexuality, education, employment discrimination, health, and social networks. Although course content will primarily focus on issues of migration impacting the United States, we will also consider contemporary migration issues of importance in other areas of the world.

class: ILRGL 6377
class title: Issues in South Asian Studies
description: This is an events-based course. Students will attend ten seminars in the South Asia Program seminar series. The work of scholars, filmmakers, and artists presenting research in the series spans the region and its diasporas (e.g., India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Bhutan, and Indian Ocean worlds). Topics considered will cross the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Students will attend these events and engage with the material presented in short response papers and supplemental readings. The objective of this course is to offer students, whether they are familiar with the region or not, new perspectives on the lived experiences of South Asia. Students will also become familiar with interdisciplinary area studies as an intellectual project.

class: ILRGL 6855
class title: Southern West Virginia's Coal Fields - Ancient Struggles Amidst Hopeful Dreams
description: This course will critically analyze the labor, political, racial and environmental struggles that have characterized the shaping of the coalfields of Southern West Virginia and to some extent, other Appalachian coalfields. Why for 130 years have so many families embraced and fought against King Coal? What has been the role of the Mine Workers union (UMWA) in shaping hope in the region? How big of a deal is religion? Race? Geography? What comprises Life in these regions of America? Attendance and participation mandatory. 

class: ILRGL 6865
class title: Thwarting the Dream of Brown v. Board of Education
description: This course will review first the 19th and early 20th century US Supreme Court cases to understand how the Government created segregation in America. The first 80 years saw a number of twists and turns, including Brown in 1954. However, the institutional forces and structured momentum created by America's zoning, housing, banking, lending laws and other governmental policies continued to push America into an actual physical segregated landscape that our schools then and now reflect. These developments were certified by a series of US Supreme Courts and state governmental taxation and legal policies that assisted in creating the current state of educational affairs in the US.

class: ILRGL 6870
class title: Introduction to Labor Research
description: Provides students interested in the labor field with the skills necessary to understand and use social science research as it relates to the labor movement. The course's four major goals are to (1) develop the skills to critically evaluate a wide variety of research relating to unions and the workplace; (2) introduce a number of quantitative and qualitative research techniques used by unions and those who study the labor movement; (3) familiarize students with the broad range of library and computer resources that can be used for labor and corporate research; and (4) provide students with an opportunity to design and conduct a research project for a national or local union.

class: ILRGL 6875
class title: Public Sector Labor Law and CB: The Turbulence Amidst Police, Policing, Teachers and Their Unions
description: The turbulence amidst police, policing, teachers and their unions. By using policy articles and certain legal cases this course seeks to show how and why certain public employees and their unions have come under such intense scrutiny by the Right and the Left. We will deconstruct how laws and workplace bargaining have gained, police and their unions, these rights and whether police and/or or teachers might have too many rights. Have the police's and teachers' ability to seemingly avoid the accountability that parts of our society are demanding occurred due to disproportionate political power? And how powerful are they?                                     

class: ILRGL 6885
class title: In The Shadow of the Tower: Building A Dynamic Local Union At Cornell
description: Against great odds, 1,000 low-paid custodians, cooks, bus drivers, animal attendants, and groundskeepers succeeded in organizing a local union at Cornell. This course examines the experience of building a dynamic local union by using the creation and development of Local 2300 UAW at Cornell University as a case study. The history is shared from the grassroots perspective of the service and maintenance staff, and rank and file leadership who organized, bargained, went on strike, and built powerful community coalitions. Students will explore and discuss the primary stages of local union development. We will examine the dilemmas and strategic choices facing worker activists as they progress from unorganized powerlessness and poverty to having collective agency and impact. Additional case studies of innovative union organizing and bargaining campaigns will be introduced for purposes of comparison with aspects of the Cornell UAW history.

class: ILRGL 7060
class title: Theories of Industrial Relations Systems
description: Traces the evolution of theory and research on industrial relations. Topics include theories of the labor movement, institutional models and evidence regarding what unions do, the origins of internal labor markets and their relationship with unionization, models of strikes, empirical assessments of arbitration, research on union decline, and empirical evidence of the impacts of new technology.

class: ILRGL 7533
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.

class: ILRHR 2600
class title: Human Resource Management
description: This class will introduce students to new developments in the world of human resources (HR). We will cover a number of topics, include how organizations now recruit and select job candidates, how organizations can make training and development more fun and more effective, and how new technologies and an emphasis on people analytics are changing how HR gets done in practice. In addition to discussion-oriented lectures, you will hear from a wide range of HR leaders and recent Cornell alumni who themselves are shaping the future of HR though an in-class "HR in Action" conversation series.  

class: ILRHR 3650
class title: Organizational Consulting: Process and Results
description: Provides students with the insights and tools they need to work successfully as human resource management consultants, both as HR managers operating within a firm to improve organizational effectiveness and as external consultants providing project support to an internal HR organization. The consulting process is examined primarily from a systems perspective. This includes the knowledge and skills required to build trust and influence, to contract with clients, and to maintain good working relationships with clients. It also includes developing a clear comprehension of the consulting process from diagnosis, through action planning, to implementation and completion. While attention is given to theory and practice, the focus is on gaining hands-on experience dealing with real-world issues. As a final project, students will work in teams on a live case providing consulting services to an organization with an existing HR issue (i.e., implementing a new HR program, effectuating a new organizational culture, and enhancing project team operations).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRHR 2600 or equivalent.

class: ILRHR 3690
class title: Managing Total Rewards
description: Over the past decade, the world of work has seen a growing trend of increasing and diversifying the set of inducements that an organization offers to its employees, including both financial (e.g., pay) and non-financial (e.g., job experience, growth opportunities) inducements. Yet, managers and practitioners are uncertain about how to combine such varying inducements together and manage as a set of "total rewards." This course is designed to help understand the ways to manage total rewards within an organization. The course introduces a total rewards model—which is comprised of strategy, work experience, incentives/rewards, and administration—and explore how the interplay of each component produces different outcomes. The outcomes of the total rewards model include (financial) efficiency, human/social capital, and ethical/social legitimacy. Relevant theories, evidence, and cases will be introduced.

class: ILRHR 4410
class title: Disability Considerations in HR Policy and Practice
description: Individuals with disabilities continue to face obstacles to gaining and maintaining employment within the U.S. workforce, even though over 30 years have passed since the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). This course provides a broad overview of the role of HR professionals in addressing this issue, by maximizing workplace disability inclusion and minimizing disability discrimination across the employment process. We will discuss the importance of this problem for people with disabilities, employers, and for society-at-large, and the business case for aligning disability inclusion with a company's strategic human capital, diversity and inclusion, and customer service imperatives. The implications for effective HR policies and practices in recruitment and hiring, career development and retention, diversity and inclusion, accessibility and accommodation, compensation and benefits and metrics and analytics will be covered across the lectures. Presentations by leading HR professionals are embedded throughout the course.

class: ILRHR 4620
class title: Staffing Organizations
description: The central goal of staffing is to ensure that your organization has the right people in the right jobs at the right time. It is hard to accomplish. In fact, nearly half of all hiring decisions are deemed a 'failure' from either the hiring manager or the worker. This course will introduce students to the challenges organizations and hiring managers face at each stage of the hiring process –– from defining job requirements though identifying, evaluating, selecting, and onboarding candidates – as well as how to overcome those challenges. We will also discuss succession planning, employee offboarding (turnover), the use of alternative work arrangements, and other activities that support an organizations' efforts to acquire and retain talent. We will explore these topics through a combination of interactive lectures, cases, applied assignments, and a series of "How do we actually do this?" conversations with talent acquisition leaders tackling these issues in real time. 

class: ILRHR 4641
class title: Business Strategy, Organizational Design, and Human Resource Strategy
description: What is a human capital-based competitive advantage? How does an organization's HR strategy connect to the day-to-day management of its employees? How, when, and to what extent do employees' contributions bring an organization closer to achieving its strategic goals? This course integrates theoretical and practical insights to help students understand how an organization can develop an HR strategy that supports the requirements of its business strategy and effectively addresses challenges encountered in the changing external environment.

class: ILRHR 4657
class title: Workplace Disability Inclusion: Innovations and Initiatives (Autism at Work)
description: This course provides an overview of the emerging initiatives in technology and technology-intensive industries to actively recruit and hire individuals on the Autism Spectrum and the implications for HR policies and practices. The course traces the opportunities and challenges encountered across the employment process in designing and implementing these initiatives, and the importance of creating a workplace culture that embraces a diverse workforce, including individuals with disabilities, and those who are neurodivergent. The topics covered will include: models of effective recruitment, screening, selection, orientation, and on-the-job training; preparatory supervisor and workforce training; building a workplace culture inclusive of individuals who are neurodivergent; considerations in career advancement, retention, and performance management; building internal and external support systems to support success; and metrics and analytics in determining elements of program effectiveness at individual and organizational levels. The course requirements will include: related readings, case scenarios, weekly quizzes, a final paper, and presentations by practitioners representing companies who have such initiatives. 

class: ILRHR 4664
class title: Human Resource Analytics
description: This course addresses applications of data, metrics, and analytics to human resources. It focuses on strategic aspects—e.g., alignment with organizational goals—as well as operational elements involving the collection, analysis, and reporting of people data. The course builds individual capabilities in quantitative reasoning, prepares students to make evidence-based recommendations for improving HR systems and practices, and develops skills in visualizing and presenting HR data.

class: ILRHR 5600
class title: Human Resource Management
description: Survey course designed to introduce concepts and topics in human resource management. Consideration is given to theories and applications involved in effectively managing people in organizations. Topics include recruitment, staffing, training, performance management, retention, compensation, international human resource management, and the legal environment. Emphasis is placed on exploring these issues from both strategic and tactical levels to increase organizational effectiveness.

class: ILRHR 5610
class title: Practicum in Human Resource Management
description: This first-semester course equips students with the practical knowledge and skills needed to address real-world talent challenges. Through hands-on exercises, practice cases, and regular feedback, students will sharpen the critical thinking, problem solving, and presentation skills essential for success in the MILR case competition and their future professional careers.

class: ILRHR 5645
class title: Design Thinking for HR
description: While quantitative analytics can provide strong insights to aid in decision making in the HR function, there are many questions that can only be identified and examined through the use of more qualitative techniques. This course draws on concepts, models, and tools from design thinking as a means to help students think about qualitative approaches for understanding and solving important HR and people related challenges in organizations. Specifically, the course will cover how to ask testable questions, collect and analyze qualitative data, create and test protypes, and assess best fitting solutions for addressing key employee experience challenges. Students will have the opportunity to apply the tools throughout the semester in the context of an action learning project.                                

class: ILRHR 5665
class title: Organizational Consulting
description: This course is intended to provide students with the insights and tools they need to work successfully as human resource management consults both as HR managers operating within the firm to improve organizational effectiveness and as external consultants providing project support to an internal HR organization. The consulting process is examined primarily from a systems perspective, with the goal of helping students develop the knowledge and skills required to build trust and influence, to contract with clients, and to maintain good working relationships with clients. It also includes developing a clear comprehension of the consulting process from diagnosis, through action planning, to implementation and completion.  While attention is given to theory and practice, the focus is on gaining hands-on experience dealing with real-world issues. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRHR 5600.

class: ILRHR 5680
class title: Staffing Organizations
description: The central goal of staffing is to ensure that your organization has the right people in the right jobs at the right time. It is hard to accomplish. In fact, nearly half of all hiring decisions are deemed a 'failure' from either the hiring manager or the worker. This course will introduce students to the challenges organizations and hiring managers face at each stage of the hiring process –– from defining job requirements though identifying, evaluating, selecting, and onboarding candidates – as well as how to overcome those challenges. We will also discuss succession planning, employee offboarding (turnover), the use of alternative work arrangements, and other activities that support an organizations' efforts to acquire and retain talent. We will explore these topics through a combination of interactive lectures, cases, applied assignments, and a series of "How do we actually do this?" conversations with talent acquisition leaders tackling these issues in real time. 

class: ILRHR 5690
class title: Managing Total Rewards
description: Over the past decade, the world of work has seen a growing trend of increasing and diversifying the set of inducements that an organization offers to its employees, including both financial (e.g., pay) and non-financial (e.g., job experience, growth opportunities) inducements. Yet, managers and practitioners are uncertain about how to combine such varying inducements together and manage as a set of "total rewards." This course is designed to help understand the ways to manage total rewards within an organization. The course introduces a total rewards model—which is comprised of strategy, work experience, incentives/rewards, and administration—and explore how the interplay of each component produces different outcomes. The outcomes of the total rewards model include (financial) efficiency, human/social capital, and ethical/social legitimacy. Relevant theories, evidence, and cases will be introduced.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRHR 5600 or equivalent and statistics course.

class: ILRHR 6410
class title: Disability Considerations in HR Policy and Practice
description: Individuals with disabilities continue to face obstacles to gaining and maintaining employment within the U.S. workforce, even though over 30 years have passed since the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). This course provides a broad overview of the role of HR professionals in addressing this issue, by maximizing workplace disability inclusion and minimizing disability discrimination across the employment process. We will discuss the importance of this problem for people with disabilities, employers, and for society-at-large, and the business case for aligning disability inclusion with a company's strategic human capital, diversity and inclusion, and customer service imperatives. The implications for effective HR policies and practices in recruitment and hiring, career development and retention, diversity and inclusion, accessibility and accommodation, compensation and benefits and metrics and analytics will be covered across the lectures. Presentations by leading HR professionals are embedded throughout the course.

class: ILRHR 6451
class title: Leadership Assessment for Managers
description: This is a leadership course for those of us who want to learn more about ourselves and about others: how we, with our unique styles, influence and lead others, as peers, as direct reports, as supervisors and managers, and as leaders. Through discussions and skills practice, we learn what we do well and what we might improve so that we become even more effective: not only effective at getting results but also effective at building, maintaining, and even improving relationships. Grow your leadership skills in two ways: through increased self-awareness and interactions with other students. 1. Increase self-awareness: Our course provides you with feedback from your peers, direct reports, and/or supervisors and uses tools like behavior assessments to explore your preferences. The course asks you, through assignments and self-reflection, to consider who you are, what you value, and how you got to where you are in life and work. 2. Learn from (and improve) how we interact with others.  We each bring with us a unique set of experiences to our work: experiences that have shaped what we value; how we think; and how we approach relationships, problems, and tasks. Our course helps us to learn leadership by understanding other individuals. We use small-group discussions and team assignments to help you learn from others and adapt to others' styles and preferences.

class: ILRHR 6657
class title: Workplace Disability Inclusion: Innovations and Initiatives (Autism at Work)
description: This course provides an overview of the emerging initiatives in technology and technology-intensive industries to actively recruit and hire individuals on the Autism Spectrum and the implications for HR policies and practices. The course traces the opportunities and challenges encountered across the employment process in designing and implementing these initiatives, and the importance of creating a workplace culture that embraces a diverse workforce, including individuals with disabilities, and those who are neurodivergent. The topics covered will include: models of effective recruitment, screening, selection, orientation, and on-the-job training; preparatory supervisor and workforce training; building a workplace culture inclusive of individuals who are neurodivergent; considerations in career advancement, retention, and performance management; building internal and external support systems to support success; and metrics and analytics in determining elements of program effectiveness at individual and organizational levels. The course requirements will include: related readings, case scenarios, weekly quizzes, a final paper, and presentations by practitioners representing companies who have such initiatives. 

class: ILRHR 6910
class title: Business Strategy and Finance for Human Resources
description: This course will address how firms make strategic decisions.  The first half of the course will focus on the foundational models and tools for strategic decision making such as industry analysis, internal analysis, competitive advantage, and business strategies.  The goal of the second half of this course is to provide students with the fundaments of finance and accounting from the perspective of human resource management.

class: ILRHR 9620
class title: Doctoral Research Seminar in HR Management-Macro
description: Aimed at reading, understanding, and conducting research in HRM. Whereas ILRHR 9610 aims at operational areas of HRM, this seminar focuses on topics of relevance to strategic HRM.

class: ILRID 1510
class title: Introduction to Industrial and Labor Relations
description: An ILR education is grounded in the social sciences. Students and faculty explore and gain an understanding of the workplace through economics, sociology, psychology, history, political science, labor relations, and law and society perspectives. Students also learn how work and workplace issues fit into the larger society and economy. As a result, they acquire knowledge and skills that help them to think critically, analyze the social and economic relationships impacting the workplace and solve problems facing work and workers.

class: ILRID 1525
class title: Psychology of Work: Theories and Applications
description: This course examines the underlying psychological processes that impact how and why we work, how we succeed in accomplishing work goals, and how we work together. Students will be exposed to foundational theories from a variety of disciplines, primarily psychology and micro-organizational behavior, which can help us to understand human behavior in work contexts and will examine how these theories can be applied to inform effective organizational policies and practices. The course offers a theoretical and practical examination of numerous topics, including personality, motivation, judgment and decision making, social influence, power, conflict and fairness, and morality at work. 

class: ILRID 1700
class title: Introduction to Organizations and Management
description: This is an introductory course intended for students outside of the ILR School to acquire a basic understanding of management and organizations.This course will fulfill the management requirement for the university-wide undergraduate business minor.  Students will learn contemporary and historical perspectives on work, management, formal organizations, and the role of business in society.

class: ILRID 2250
class title: Writing Seminar in ILR
description: Writing seminar whose topic changes depending on semester and instructor.

class: ILRID 2510
class title: Foundations of Diversity Dynamics
description: The purpose of this course is to introduce you to core concepts related to diversity and inclusion. We will begin with an exploration of social identities and how they relate to key psycho-social processes –such as social cognition, power and privilege, stereotyping, and status differentiation – underlying interpersonal and intergroup dynamics in settings characterized by demographic diversity. We will then turn to an analysis of remedies or interventions for addressing diversity-related challenges and unpack what is meant by "equity and inclusion." A guiding assumption for this course is that in order to fully understand the implications of diversity for society, you must personally confront issues having to do with power, privilege, stereotypes, identity, and discrimination. In an effort to increase awareness and understanding, we will adopt an experiential approach whenever possible, including videos and related discussions, experiential exercises and activities, fieldwork, and written assignments.

class: ILRID 2610
class title: Intergroup Dialogue
description: Intergroup dialogue is a form of communication specifically designed for people to engage with one another across social, cultural, and power differences in a critical and meaningful way. This class prepares students to live and work in a diverse world, and educates them in making choices that advance equity. Its main objectives are to: explore our human capacity and need to connect with ourselves and others; increase understanding of personal and social identities and how they inform our lives; explore the effects of social inequity at personal, interpersonal, and structural levels (including the ways in which it disrupts human connection); develop students' skills to communicate, work, and lead effectively across difference; and strengthen individual and collective capacities to strategize for change on campus and beyond.
outcome: Cultivate authentic and meaningful interpersonal connections across difference., Describe your own personal experience of multiple social identities., Articulate connections between individuals' experiences of social identity and societal systems of power, privilege, and oppression., Use dialogue practices in communicating with others., Meaningfully engage with a range of perspectives on issues related to societal systems of power, privilege, and oppression., Identify actions and opportunities for ameliorating inequities connected to social identity., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ILRID 2660
class title: Essential Desktop Applications
description: Provides skills in the use of personal computers that run the Windows operating system. Covers fundamental technical concepts and time-saving techniques for Windows, and Microsoft Excel, Access, and PowerPoint. Emphasizes hands-on experience and development of PC-based solutions and strategies by using examples that address human resource and other practical real-world issues. Students will take the industry-recognized Microsoft test to gain certification as a Microsoft Office Specialist (MOS) in Excel. The skills developed in this course are useful prerequisites for several elective courses in human resource management and essential in the 21st-century workplace. 

class: ILRID 4635
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Advocacy and Policy
description: Unemployment is damaging to individuals, families, and society. Governments around the world have attempted to mitigate these harms, in some countries through generous out-of-work benefits, targeted retraining services for job seekers, and disincentives for employers to lay workers off in the first place. But why is unemployment so persistent in capitalist societies? What does it mean for an individual to be unemployed? What can the US learn from other countries to better combat unemployment and reduce its socially damaging effects? Students will work with community partners to assist the unemployed or conduct policy-relevant research.

class: ILRID 4645
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Engaged Learning Option
description: In the Engaged Learning Option, you will work locally in the community, either with the attorneys at Legal Assistance of Western New York to assist unemployed clients, or with Dr. Ian Greer on a research project gathering and analyzing data.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: ILRID 4635.

class: ILRID 4699
class title: Advanced Desktop Applications
description: This course will incorporate advanced topics in Microsoft Excel and Access. The Excel portion will focus on advanced use of functions, creating form controls, macros, pivot tables, and organization and analysis of large data sets to incorporate into a model. The Access portion will focus on integrated use with Excel and complex relationships and queries.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRHR 2600 or significant experience (two to four years) using office applications. Highly recommended prerequisite: ILRID 2660 or equivalent.

class: ILRID 4826
class title: Leading Dialogue Across Difference: Practicum in Intergroup Relations
description: Through theoretical and experiential learning, students in EDUC 4826 will further develop knowledge and skills gained in EDUC 2610 for leadership across social, cultural, and political differences. Through weekly seminar sessions, students gain a working knowledge of scholarly literature drawn from the fields of critical intergroup dialogue, practice theory, social identity theory, and social justice education. Students learn about the theories and empirical evidence on why and how communication and collaboration across difference work. Moreover, through unique experiential learning opportunities in the classroom, students practice communication and collaboration across difference, as well as facilitation skills fundamental to leading intergroup dialogue processes.
outcome: Communicate effectively across difference., Demonstrate disciplinary knowledge of literature on critical dialogue., Apply skills for leading individuals from different backgrounds within a multicultural society., Demonstrate capability to mediate conflict through dialogue for mutual understanding., Through critical reflection, examine how personal and group socialization connects with larger societal systems., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRID 2610 or permission of instructor.

class: ILRID 6635
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Advocacy and Policy
description: Unemployment is damaging to individuals, families, and society. Governments around the world have attempted to mitigate these harms, in some countries through generous out-of-work benefits, targeted retraining services for job seekers, and disincentives for employers to lay workers off in the first place. But why is unemployment so persistent in capitalist societies? What does it mean for an individual to be unemployed? What can the US learn from other countries to better combat unemployment and reduce its socially damaging effects? Students will work with community partners to assist the unemployed or conduct policy-relevant research.

class: ILRID 6645
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Engaged Learning Option
description: In the engaged learning option, you will work with community partners providing legal advice or workforce development services, or gather and analyze research data supervised by Prof. Ian Greer.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: ILRID 6635 or LAW 6635.

class: ILRID 6990
class title: Advanced Desktop Applications
description: This course will incorporate advanced topics in Microsoft Excel and Access. The Excel portion will focus on advanced use of functions, creating form controls, macros, pivot tables, and organization and analysis of large data sets to incorporate into a model. The Access portion will focus on integrated use with Excel and complex relationships and queries.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRHR 5600 or significant experience (two to four years) using office applications. Highly recommended prerequisite: ILRID 2660 or equivalent.

class: ILRID 7570
class title: The Enterprise of Social Science Research
description: Designed for social science MS/PhD students early in their academic career, this course provides an overview of philosophical debates about the aims and nature of social science research, processes involved in initiating research projects, and key methods of data collection and analysis. It will also introduce students to the ILR School, its various sub-fields and disciplines, and to academia, both as an institution and as a career. The aim of the course is to give students the foundational knowledge needed to undertake a graduate research degree and pursue a career as a researcher.

class: ILRLE 2400
class title: Economics of Wages and Employment
description: Applies the theory and elementary tools of economics to the characteristics and problems of the labor market. Considers both the demand (employer) and supply (employee) sides of the market to gain a deeper understanding of the effects of various government programs and private decisions targeted at the labor market. Topics include employment demand, basic compensation determination, education and training, benefits and the structure of compensation, labor-force participation and its relation to household production, occupational choice, migration, labor-market discrimination, and the effects of unions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 and ECON 1120 or permission of instructor.

class: ILRLE 3465
class title: Bridging the Divide: Labor Market Reforms and Place-Based Policies
description: Should policy interventions target inequality between workers or disparities between places? Inequality has risen in most developed countries in recent decades. While top incomes have grown significantly, incomes at the bottom of the distribution have increased much less. In light of these trends, this course examines the role of labor market and place-based policies in reducing inequality, and discusses the trade-offs that arise between reducing inequality and promoting economic activity.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, ECON 1120, and ILRLE 2400 or equivalent.

class: ILRLE 3486
class title: Field Experiments in Economics and Business
description: Field experiments are ubiquitous in both academic economics and the corporate world. They are highly effective tools for both researchers and business leaders to assess the effectiveness of different interventions and are used to test theories, inform policy and enhance business strategies. Modern digital tools have made it increasingly easy to conduct field experiments and collect high-quality data on a large scale. This course will cover the foundational methods of designing and analyzing field experiments, and discuss seminal field experimental work in economics and business. As part of this course, students will conduct their own online field experiment.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRLE 2400 or ECON 1110 and ECON 1120. 

class: ILRLE 7450
class title: Seminar in Labor Economics I
description: Includes reading and discussion of selected topics in labor economics. Stresses applications of economic theory and econometrics to the labor market and human resource areas.

class: ILRLE 9400
class title: Workshop in Labor Economics
description: Research workshop featuring guests lecturers. Presentations of completed papers and work in progress by faculty members, advanced graduate students, and speakers from other universities. Focuses on the formulation, design, and execution of dissertations.

class: ILROB 2220
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ILROB 3255
class title: Creativity Sprint: An Entrepreneurship Hackathon
description: The ability to shepherd an idea from ideation to development to implementation is an essential skill in today's business environment for entrepreneurs, innovators, and organizational change agents. To this end, this course aims to develop students' abilities to identify problems and generate solutions to real world business and societal challenges. The course focuses on problem identification (understanding the core elements of a presenting problem), idea generation (developing solutions to those problems), and implementation (putting those solutions into practice). The course includes lecture-based content and activities around these topics and features participation in a weekend-long hackathon event that serves as a practicum experience where students will generate, develop, and pitch an idea related to a societal or business challenge.
outcome: Identify real problems (a.k.a., pain points)., Effectively ideate creative solutions, including thinking through the idea's feasability, viability, and novelty., Recognize how technologies and solutions from one industry can be adapted to solve teh pain points of another industry., 

class: ILROB 3270
class title: Social Capital and Organizations
description: This course will familiarize students with contemporary theories of how social relationships (also referred to as "social capital") influence employment-relevant outcomes among individuals, firms, and broader markets. Topics will be informed by academic research and applied in prominent organizational settings. Students will explore topics including tie strength, network structure, social closure, embedded relationships, contaigion, visibility, status, collective wisdom, diffusion and adoption.

class: ILROB 4295
class title: Organizations Across the Lifecycle
description: This course reviews sociological theory and research on a selected set of common issues and problems that face organizations as they go from founding to established operations. We begin by examining factors that affect people's decisions to found new organizations, then consider choices in organization and job design, problems of exercising authority and influence effectively, group dynamics that may affect decision-making and coordination, and different approaches to managing cooperative and competitive relations with external audiences. Course topics will be examined through readings, class discussion, cases and interactive exercises.

class: ILROB 4710
class title: Social Science Research Methods
description: The goal of this course is to give students the foundational skills necessary to conduct scientific research in the field of organizational behavior. Topics covered will include generating research ideas, ethical considerations, common experimental and non-experimental designs, creating surveys and other measures, interpreting results, and writing research papers. Students will be asked to conduct their own research projects as part of the class. This course focuses on methods from psychology and related disciplines and is recommended for students considering doing honors thesis research.

class: ILROB 5200
class title: Organizational Behavior
description: Survey of concepts, theories, and research from the fields of sociology, psychology, and social psychology as these relate to the behavior of individuals, groups, and work organizations. Topics include: job attitudes, motivation, leadership and power, group formation, organizational structure, and interorganizational relations. This course is designed for students in professional programs.

class: ILROB 5290
class title: Social Capital and Organizations
description: This course will familiarize graduate students with contemporary theories of how social relationships (also referred to as "social capital") influence employment-relevant outcomes among individuals, firms, and broader markets. Topics will be informed by academic research and applied in prominent organizational settings. Students will explore topics including tie strength, network structure, social closure, embedded relationships, contagion, visibility, status, collective wisdom, diffusion and adoption.

class: ILROB 6715
class title: Social Science Research Methods
description: The goal of this course is to give students the foundational skills necessary to conduct scientific research in the field of organizational behavior. Topics covered will include generating research ideas, ethical considerations, common experimental and non-experimental designs, creating surveys and other measures, interpreting results, and writing research papers. Students will be asked to conduct their own research projects as part of the class. This course focuses on methods from psychology and related disciplines and is recommended for students considering doing honors thesis research.

class: ILROB 7220
class title: Macro Organizational Behavior Seminar
description: This doctoral seminar is designed to provide you with an overview of major theoretical traditions in the field of macro-Organizational Behavior. We will examine the historical development of sociological theories of organizations and contemporary issues in macro organizational research. The readings are organized in a semi-chronological fashion – we start with older, established classics and move into more contemporary lines of work.  This course heavily emphasizes reading and analysis of primary source material. Students will be expected to lead a discussion class as well as submit a final written research proposal due at the end of the semester. The goal will be to convert our consumption of scholarship into production of robust research.

class: ILROB 9200
class title: Organizational Behavior Workshop
description: This workshop is designed to extend the forum of current research presentations undertaken by faculty members and graduate students in the Department of Organizational Behavior and by invited guests in the M&amp;O/ILROB Seminar Series. In particular, students will hone their academic citizen skills by practicing journal referee report construction using the talks/papers presented in the Seminar Series. In addition to attending the weekly seminar, students are expected to attend the additional 75 min workshop the same day, along with submitting a draft referee report of the material presented in the seminar. The workshop is designed to improve the construction of referee report writing, making it easier to produce high quality and constructive referee reports throughout the course of your career. 

class: ILRST 2100
class title: Introductory Statistics and Data Science
description: Statistics is about understanding the world through data. We are surrounded by data, so there is a lot to understand. Covers data exploration and display, data gathering methods, probability, and statistical inference methods through contingency tables and linear regression. The emphasis is on thinking scientifically, understanding what is commonly done with data (and doing some of it for yourself), and laying a foundation for further study. Students learn to use statistical software and simulation tools to discover fundamental results. They use computers regularly; the test includes both multimedia materials and a software package. This course does not focus on data from any particular discipline, but will use real-world examples from a wide variety of disciplines and current events.
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory algebra.

class: ILRST 2110
class title: Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II
description: A second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRST 2100 or equivalent introductory statistics course.

class: ILRST 2130
class title: Applied Regression Analysis
description: This seven week, two-credit class will cover the regression requirements, hypothesis tests, and interpretation of results. Students will learn to identify the data necessary to perform a regression analysis, evaluate the conditions, and apply the statistical tests. Interpretation of overall results will be made. Independent/group projects by each student will be done. These will consist of identifying an issue of interest, a relevant data set, and analysis using the regression methods. Presentation of the results in verbal and written form will be required. Recommended for students who want to develop applied analysis skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRST 2100 or equivalent.

class: ILRST 3080
class title: Probability Models and Inference
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, the method of moments, sampling distributions and confidence intervals.
outcome: Students will be able to manipulate random variables and their distributions using differential and integral calculus., Students will be able to derive properties of standard probability., Students will be able to derive maximum likelihood estimators for standard probability distributions and discuss their properties., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200 or their equivalents. MATH 1120 or equivalent and MATH 2220 or equivalent. 

class: ILRST 3100
class title: Statistical Sampling
description: Theory and application of statistical sampling, especially in regard to sample design, cost, estimation of population quantities, and error estimation. Assessment of nonsampling errors. Discussion of applications to social and biological sciences and to business problems. 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: ILRST 3110
class title: Probability Models and Inference for the Social Sciences
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing.
distribution categories: (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or equivalent.

class: ILRST 3900
class title: Causal Inference
description: Causal claims are essential in both science and policy. Would a new experimental drug improve disease survival? Would a new advertisement cause higher sales? Would a person's income be higher if they finished college? These questions involve counterfactuals: outcomes that would be realized if a treatment were assigned differently. This course will define counterfactuals mathematically, formalize conceptual assumptions that link empirical evidence to causal conclusions, and engage with statistical methods for estimation. Students will enter the course with knowledge of statistical inference: how to assess if a variable is associated with an outcome. Students will emerge from the course with knowledge of causal inference: how to assess whether an intervention to change that input would lead to a change in the outcome.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2110 or PSYCH 2500 or SOC 3010 or ECON 3110 or equivalent. 

class: ILRST 4110
class title: Categorical Data
description: Categorical data analysis, including logistic regression, log-linear models, stratified tables, matched pairs analysis, polytomous response, and ordinal data. Applications in biological, biomedical and social sciences.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3020, BTRY 6020, or equivalent with BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710 also highly recommended.

class: ILRST 5050
class title: Statistics at Work
description: This course introduces MILR students to the critical analysis process involved in social science research and practice in the workplace. The uses of analytics, particularly in workforce development will be explored through a combination of statistical methods and application to case studies. Students will distinguish the stages of analytics, develop data summaries and evaluate the results with statistical tests. The hypothesis testing method and statistical decision-making will be reviewed. Statistical methods will include t-tests, chi-squares, regression models (linear, multiple, and logistic).

class: ILRST 5110
class title: Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II
description: Second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRST 5100 or equivalent introductory statistics course.

class: ILRST 6100
class title: Statistical Methods I
description: Develops and uses statistical methods to analyze data arising from a wide variety of applications. Topics include descriptive statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, inference for a single population, comparisons between two populations, one- and two-way analysis of variance, comparisons among population means, analysis of categorical data, and correlation and regression analysis. Introduces interactive computing through statistical software. Emphasizes basic principles and criteria for selection of statistical techniques.
outcome: Learn to develop and use statistical methods to analyze data arising from a wide variety of applications. Students should learn to apply methodologies which include descriptive statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, inference for a single population, comparisons between two populations, one- and two-way analysis of variance, comparisons among population means, analysis of categorical data, and correlation and regression analysis., 

class: ILRST 7170
class title: Theory of Linear Models
description: Properties of the multivariate normal distribution. Distribution theory for quadratic forms. Properties of least squares and maximum likelihood estimates. Methods for fixed-effect models of less than full rank. Analysis of balanced and unbalanced mixed-effects models. Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. Some use of software packages and illustrative examples.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 4090, BTRY 6020 or equivalents.

class: IM 4990
class title: Honors Research I
description: Each participant must submit brief proposal approved by Honors Committee.

class: IM 4991
class title: Honors Research II
description: IM 4991 is the second part of the year-long honors thesis course in the Independent Major Program.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: IM 4990.

class: INDO 1100
class title: Elements of Indonesian Language and Culture
description: This course is for students with no previous knowledge of Indonesian or Malay language. Students will learn enough phrases to be able to handle very simple interactions, express very simple needs, and behave appropriately in Indonesian settings. Cultural information will be taught in English. Indonesianists of Cornell share fun information about their fields of expertise regarding Indonesia.  80% of the course, the Bahasa Indonesia language component, will be practiced.

class: INDO 1121
class title: Elementary Indonesian I
description: Gives a thorough grounding in basic speaking, listening, reading and writing skills.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: INDO 2201
class title: Intermediate Indonesian I
description: Develops all four skills: reading, writing, speaking, and listening comprehension.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INDO 1122 or equivalent.

class: INDO 3301
class title: Advanced Indonesian I
description: Practical language course at a high intermediate and low advanced level in which students read and discuss selected materials on issues of their academic interests, write essays, and make oral presentations.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INDO 2202 or equivalent.

class: INDO 4401
class title: Advanced Indonesian for Research I
description: A critical academic language course at a higher advanced level that sharpens students' proficiency of integrated language skills from an advanced high or above level, based on the ACTFL proficiency benchmarks. Students read, discuss, debate and explore hypotheses on issues from specialized disciplines to broader abstract ideas.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INDO 3302 or equivalent.

class: INFO 1200
class title: Information Ethics, Law, and Policy
description: This course investigates the ethical, legal, and policy foundations of contemporary information technology. Through lectures, readings, discussions, and short assignments, we will address contemporary challenges ranging from the contests over intellectual property and privacy in a networked world to questions of inequality and control over technology. We will cover key areas of technology law and policy such as computing ethics; intellectual property; competition, antitrust, and freedom of expression; privacy and security; and AI ethics. We will also address new ethical questions and controversies that law and policy has yet to sort out. Through this course you'll learn about the key frameworks, processes, and institutions that govern the contemporary world of information technology, along with key theories and methods from academic fields that shape and inform them (law, philosophy, economics, political science, communication, sociology, etc.). You will also learn core reading and analytic skills central to success in the worlds of social science, law, policy, and many other settings. But above all you'll learn to engage critically and strategically with the worlds of information and technology around you, deciding what kind of information consumer, user, producer, and citizen you want to be.

class: INFO 1300
class title: Introductory Design and Programming for the Web
description: This course is designed to introduce students to the conceptual, design, and technical aspects of developing websites. No prior knowledge of programming, or web or graphic design is assumed or necessary. In the course, we will cover basic web technologies such as HyperText Markup Language (HTML), Cascading StyleSheets (CSS), and some JavaScript (JS).

class: INFO 1998
class title: First-year Team Projects
description: Independent work in information science as part of a student-led team project. Intended for first-year students on project teams, project team members in training, and for project team members performing tasks that are not core to information science.

class: INFO 2040
class title: Networks
description: This interdisciplinary course examines network structures and how they matter in everyday life. The course examines how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects each of these worlds. Tools of graph theory and game theory are taught and then used to analyze networks. Topics covered include the web, the small world phenomenon, markets, neural networks, contagion, search and the evolution of networks.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: INFO 2300
class title: Intermediate Design and Programming for the Web
description: This course is designed to introduce students to the conceptual, design, and technical aspects of developing server-side interactive websites. Students will learn how to process HTTP requests, dynamically render HTML, populate and store web content in a relational database using SQL, and securely implement login/logout sessions through server-side scripting. Through a succession of projects, students learn and practice how to apply these principles to the creation of interactive and data-driven websites programmed in PHP and SQL. Design, inclusivity, and usability issues are emphasized.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 1300 and CS 1110 or CS 1112.

class: INFO 2450
class title: Communication and Technology
description: Introduces students to the Communication and Information Technologies focus area of the communication department and the Human Systems track for information science. It examines several approaches to understanding technology and its role in human behavior and society. Topics include psychological aspects of computer-mediated communication; how design plays a role in the way we interface with technology and collaborate with each other; and the ways in which communication technology is situated inside social and institutional structures and cultural formations.
outcome: Students will be able to evaluate (both existing and hypothetical) communication technologies using principles of user-centered design., Students will be able to anticipate consequences of communication technology (both existing and hypothetical) on individual behavior and personal well-being., Students will be able to anticipate consequences of communication technology (both existing and hypothetical) on collective behavior and effectiveness., 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: INFO 2950
class title: Introduction to Data Science
description: INFO 2950 is an applied introductory course on the foundations of data science, focusing on using data to identify patterns, evaluating the strength and significance of relationships, and generating predictions using data. Topics covered include the core principles of statistical programming (such as data frames, Python/R packages, reproducible workflows, and version control), univariate and multivariate statistical analysis of small and medium-size datasets, regression methods, hypothesis testing, probability models, basic supervised and unsupervised machine learning, data visualization, and network analysis. Students will learn how to use data to make effective arguments in a way that promotes the ethical usage of data. Students who complete the course will be able to produce meaningful, data-driven analyses of real-world problems and will be prepared to begin more advanced work in data-intensive domains.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one course is core statistics (MATH 1710 or equivalent) and one course in core programming (CS 1110 or CS 1112) or permission of instructor.

class: INFO 3300
class title: Visual Data Analytics for the Web
description: This course will cover technologies for representing, modeling and displaying data in the context of interactive web pages. Practical skills for building web pages will be mixed with data mining algorithms and visualization design theory. We will use the D3 Javascript library to develop both static and dynamic visualizations, learn more about programming in Javascript, and explore web scalable vector graphics (SVG). Through design critique and formal study, we will identify the techniques visualization developers employ to create the "right" visualization for a given use case.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110/ENGRD 2110 and INFO 2300 or INFO 2310 or permission of instructor.

class: INFO 3350
class title: Text Mining History and Literature
description: The class will introduce methods for computer-assisted analysis of historical and literary text collections. It will cover corpus curation, representing text as data, building statistical models from text, and interpreting quantitative results. The class will also reflect on how computational methods fit with existing practices in the humanities, and how we can use models as complements to our own interpretations. Following the course, students will be able to assist faculty in quantitative and computational humanities scholarship.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 2950 

class: INFO 3450
class title: Human-Computer Interaction Design
description: This course focuses on user experience design (UX) and the life cycle of interface design from the user perspective. We will discuss key aspects of the human-centered design process: understanding, analyzing, and formalizing user needs, exploring possible design solutions to address user needs, creating prototypes to externalize design ideas, and evaluating the usability of these prototypes.
outcome: Students will be able to appraise the human-centered design cycle and human-computer interaction design concepts., Students will be able to build practical skills required to apply the human-centered design process in technology design through class activities and a semester-long project., Students will be able to design a user interface in a semester-long project, including interim milestones that walk the students through the specific stages of the design process., Students will be able to develop teamwork skills through a semester-long group project., 

class: INFO 3660
class title: History and Theory of Digital Art
description: In this course, we will examine the role of electronic and digital technologies in the arts of the late 20th and 21st centuries with emphasis on Europe and North America. Beginning with the cybernetically and systems-inspired work of the late sixties, we will explore early uses of computer technology, including early experiments in synthetic video in the 1970s. An overview of pre-internet telematic experiments will lead to an investigation of net art and later currents of digital art. The ongoing development of behavioral art forms will be a central theme. Critical evaluation of various attitudes concerning technology will be encouraged.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: INFO 3900
class title: Causal Inference
description: Causal claims are essential in both science and policy. Would a new experimental drug improve disease survival? Would a new advertisement cause higher sales? Would a person's income be higher if they finished college? These questions involve counterfactuals: outcomes that would be realized if a treatment were assigned differently. This course will define counterfactuals mathematically, formalize conceptual assumptions that link empirical evidence to causal conclusions, and engage with statistical methods for estimation. Students will enter the course with knowledge of statistical inference: how to assess if a variable is associated with an outcome. Students will emerge from the course with knowledge of causal inference: how to assess whether an intervention to change that input would lead to a change in the outcome.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2110 or PSYCH 2500 or SOC 3010 or ECON 3110 or equivalent.

class: INFO 4125
class title: Project Management
description: This introductory course will emphasize the interpersonal skills necessary by project teams to manage demanding industry projects. Through a semester long simulated IS project, students will develop and apply a range of skills including time management, effective conflict resolution, negotiation, risk management, change control, and appropriate goal setting to adequately manage and execute their projects. Students will work in teams to engage in the 5 phases of the project management life cycle which includes: project initiation, planning, execution, monitoring, and project closure.
outcome: Define industry project management lingo and terms., Use a range of project management skills such as time management, self- management, risk management and conflict resolution to solve a complex multi-faced Information Science (IS) project., Systematically apply the 5 phases of the Project Management (PM) life cycle to solve a simulated IS project., Collaborate in teams to cohesively execute and manage an IS software project., Devise strategies to address teaming challenges and create more inclusive IS teaming experience., Establish a team contract stipulating the team's acceptable modes of conduct., Reflect on how prior diverse (racial, cultural, ethnic etc.) project team experiences affect our understanding of project management best practices., 

class: INFO 4145
class title: Privacy and Security in the Data Economy
description: Increasingly, social and economic interactions are mediated by online platforms and algorithmic systems that rely on ubiquitous connectivity and data accumulation for their operation. While these systems have brought an unprecedented number of new products and services that have fostered growth and innovation, they have also created novel challenges to privacy and data security. In this course, we explore privacy and data security as multi-faceted concepts with economic, legal, social, ethical, and psychological underpinnings.
outcome: Identify the tradeoffs involved in decisions to protect or to disclose personal information., Understand information security not only as a technical problem, but a problem of competing incentives from multiple stakeholders., Relate economic and behavioral theories with privacy and security decisions., Analyze emerging privacy and security trends as a multi-faceted problem with technical and social dimensions., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: INFO 4240
class title: Designing Technology for Social Impact
description: The social impact of technologies is typically thought about fairly late, if ever, in the design process. Indeed, it can be difficult at design time to predict what effects technologies will have. Nevertheless, design decisions can inadvertently "lock in" particular values early on. In this course, we will draw on science &amp; technology studies, technology design, and the arts to analyze the values embodied in technology design and to design technologies to promote positive social impact. What social and cultural values do technology designs consciously or unconsciously promote? To what degree can social impact be "built into" a technology? How can we take social and cultural values into account in design?
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: INFO 4301
class title: Ethics in New Media, Technology, and Communication
description: This course examines moral and ethical issues in communication, new media, and technology. Using theories and research in moral philosophy and psychology, we examine how people perceive and reason about ethical issues presented by media and technology, and how moral action is influenced by cognitive, emotional, and ethical belief systems. Issues of autonomy, transparency, harm, privacy, manipulation, justice, democracy, equality, and care are discussed. We analyze the consistency between personal and professional ethics, the importance of moral character and agency, and the translation of moral thought to ethical action, and address the development of professional and personal ethical codes of conduct and research for communication professionals in the areas of new media and technology.
outcome: Students will be able to increase awareness of moral and ethical issues in media, technology, and communication., Students will be able to explain moral psychology and ethical principles., Students will be able to examine moral reasoning and ethical responsibilities—both personal and professional—that affect people and society., Students will be able to examine issues and implications of ethical relativism and ethical principles., Students will be able to reason thoughtfully and ethically about current cases and news items in communication, media, and technology., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG)

class: INFO 4320
class title: Introduction to Rapid Prototyping and Physical Computing
description: This class provides an introduction to modern rapid prototyping techniques such as laser cutting, 3D printing and microcontroller programming (such as the Arduino system). Using these tools, small multidisciplinary groups conduct the hardware project of their choice exploring topics as varied as: Universal Access, tangible interfaces, toys, personal or medical assistants and new musical instruments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 2300. 

class: INFO 4420
class title: Human Computer Interaction Studio
description: This course will introduce User Experience design technique taught in a Studio. Students will work on a series of design studies and a semester long design project exploring advanced User Interaction design techniques. The course is designed to help students start a design portfolio to reflect their work. Students will be expected to buy small art supplies.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 3450 or equivalent.

class: INFO 4430
class title: Teams and Technology
description: This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of research, design, and management of teams whose work and interactions are influenced by technology. Key questions that are addressed include: How does technology influence teamwork? How do we design technology to support teamwork? How do we build effective teams and team interactions for teams that work face to face or online? To address these questions the course will draw primarily from literature in organizational behavior, social psychology, design and human computer interaction. Group exercises will be used to actively build teamwork and team-leadership skills. Topics will include group effectiveness, human robot teamwork, group composition, computer supported collaboration, conflict, group dynamics, temporal issues in groups, geographically distributed teams, and measurement issues of group dynamics and performance.

class: INFO 4500
class title: Language and Technology
description: Examines how new communication technologies affect the way we produce and understand language and modify interaction with one another. Focuses on the collaborative nature of language use and how Internet technologies affect the joint activities of speakers and listeners during the construction of meaning in conversation
outcome: Demonstrate a detailed understanding of theoretical perspectives, through careful reading and discussion of class materials., Apply theories and methods from class to research projects., Demonstrate organizational and collaborative skills through group research projects., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2450/INFO 2450 or permission of instructor.

class: INFO 4505
class title: Computing and Global Development
description: To date, most computing technologies have primarily benefited urban, affluent, and literate people in developed regions by empowering them with more information, resources, and agency. These technologies currently exclude billions of people worldwide, such as rural residents, people with disabilities, and indigenous communities, who are too poor to afford modern devices, too remote to be connected, or too low-literate to navigate the mostly text-driven Internet. In recent years, researchers and practitioners have examined how computing technologies can be designed or appropriated to empower such underserved communities. This course introduces students to the field of Information and Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD). Through discussions of case studies from the Global South, students will study how computing technologies are used in different global development domains, such as agriculture, finance, health, social justice, and education. They will gain understanding of socio-economic, cultural, and political forces that impact technology adoption in low-resource environments and will learn to design, build, and evaluate inclusive technologies to empower marginalized people.​
outcome: Students will learn to unpack terms like "development" and "poverty", and the role that technology has played in both, through recent decades., Students will learn how specific technologies have played out in key domains of global development, such as education, health, etc., Students will learn to identify and critically examine approaches to the design of technology in the context of global development., Students will learn to put these approaches into practice and analyze how other initiatives do the same., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: INFO 4555
class title: Business Intelligence Systems
description: This course covers the fundamental technical and organizational concepts and challenges related to the development of Business Intelligence Systems, a key component crucial to the competitiveness of a wide range of organizations. Topics covered include: data profiling, dimensional data modeling, data transformation, metadata systems, data governance, data delivery options, and an overview of emerging technologies in this space. Course is comprised of interactive lectures, work/lab sessions, and a substantial team project.

class: INFO 4900
class title: Independent Reading and Research
description: Independent reading and research for undergraduates.

class: INFO 4910
class title: Teaching in Information Science
description: Involves working as a teaching assistant in a course in the information science or information science, systems, and technology major.

class: INFO 4940
class title: Special Topics in Information Science
description: Study of topics not currently covered in INFO offerings, as determined by faculty and student interest.

class: INFO 4997
class title: Practical Training in Information Science
description: This independent study course offers IS majors (i.e., undergraduates whose applications to affiliate with the IS major have been approved) an opportunity to reflect on concepts from information science as they were encountered and applied in a recent internship. Students write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of the information science major.
outcome: Analyze societal implications involving information technology., Apply basic principles of information science to reason about information in the world., Understand the challenges and opportunities in information Science., 

class: INFO 4998
class title: Team Projects
description: Advanced independent work in information science as part of a student-led team project. Students must make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project.

class: INFO 5000
class title: Practical Training in Information Science for International Students
description: This independent study course offers IS MPS Grad Students strictly for CPT purposes only.
outcome: Analyze societal implications involving information technology., Apply basic principles of information science to reason about information in the world., Understand the challenges and opportunities in information Science., 

class: INFO 5001
class title: Computing for Information Science
description: This is an applied course for data scientists with little-to-no programming experience who wish to harness growing digital and computational resources. The focus of the course is on generating reproducible research using programming languages and version control software. Major emphasis is placed on a pragmatic understanding of core principles of programming and packaged implementations of methods. Students will leave the course with basic computational skills implemented through many computational methods and approaches to data science; while students will not become expert programmers, they will gain the knowledge of how to adapt and expand these skills as they are presented with new questions, methods, and data.
outcome: Construct and execute basic programs using elementary programming techniques (e.g. loops, conditional statements, user-defined functions., Implement data science workflows using common, reproducible methods and software tools., Implement statistical learning and machine learning algorithms for a range of data structures., 

class: INFO 5100
class title: Visual Data Analytics for the Web
description: This course will cover technologies for representing, modeling and displaying data in the context of interactive web pages. Practical skills for building web pages will be mixed with data mining algorithms and visualization design theory. We will use the D3 Javascript library to develop both static and dynamic visualizations, learn more about programming in Javascript, and explore web scalable vector graphics (SVG). Through design critique and formal study, we will identify the techniques visualization developers employ to create the "right" visualization for a given use case.
outcome: Students will gain practical skills for building web pages though the introduction of the data mining algorithms and theoretical approaches to graphics., Students will build project management skills through group interactions., Develop analytical tools for understanding the complex programming skills needed to build complex data systems., 

class: INFO 5125
class title: Project Management
description: This introductory course will emphasize the interpersonal skills necessary by project teams to manage demanding industry projects. Through a semester long simulated IS project, students will develop and apply a range of skills including time management, effective conflict resolution, negotiation, risk management, change control, and appropriate goal setting to adequately manage and execute their projects. Students will work in teams to engage in the 5 phases of the project management life cycle which includes: project initiation, planning, execution, monitoring, and project closure.
outcome: Define industry project management lingo and terms., Use a range of project management skills such as time management, self- management, risk management and conflict resolution to solve a complex multi-faced Information Science (IS) project., Systematically apply the 5 phases of the Project Management (PM) life cycle to solve a simulated IS project., Collaborate in teams to cohesively execute and manage an IS software project., Devise strategies to address teaming challenges and create more inclusive IS teaming experience., Establish a team contract stipulating the team's acceptable modes of conduct., Reflect on how prior diverse (racial, cultural, ethnic etc.) project teaming experiences affect our understanding of project management best practices., 

class: INFO 5145
class title: Privacy and Security in the Data Economy
description: Increasingly, social and economic interactions are mediated by online platforms and algorithmic systems that rely on ubiquitous connectivity and data accumulation for their operation. While these systems have brought an unprecedented number of new products and services that have fostered growth and innovation, they have also created novel challenges to privacy and data security. In this course, we explore privacy and data security as multi-faceted concepts with economic, legal, social, ethical, and psychological underpinnings.
outcome: Identify the tradeoffs involved in decisions to protect or to disclose personal information., Understand information security not only as a technical problem, but a problem of competing incentives from multiple stakeholders., Relate economic and behavioral theories with privacy and security decisions., Analyze emerging privacy and security trends as a multi-faceted problem with technical and social dimensions., 

class: INFO 5235
class title: Sustainable Urban and Energy Delivery Systems
description: The course focuses on how to transition from legacy energy delivery infrastructures dependent on fossil fuel to a sustainable decarbonized grid that harnesses distributed renewable energy resources and responsive demand from buildings, electrified transportation systems, and industrial loads. The content includes models and abstractions for the architecture of the cyber-physical energy system, its economics, and future evolution, and numerical optimization and learning methods in support of the infrastructure's safety critical operations in the legacy system and in the future architecture. At the MSc level the students will focus on learning how to use tools and data while at the graduate level the students will be asked to also solve problems, formulate novel solutions, interpret results. Similarly, to differentiate the MSc from PhD level and course outcomes, the final project will require the MSc students to pick one out of a set of predefined problems while the PhD students will have to define an original problem and solution.
outcome: Students will be able to identify technical and operational models for energy delivery systems and appreciate why energy consumption in urban environments is bound to continue to be the most significant source of emissions under the status quo., Students will learn about and analyze emerging technological solutions in wide area sensing and IoT networks, machine learning and decision models that support the coordination the distributed renewable resources on the supply side with the flexible demand of electricity in urban environments., Students will identify security challenges that are unique of cyber-physical infrastructures and need to be addressed to advance to rip the benefits of digital technology in the field., Through assignments and projects, the students will gain hands-on experience in demonstrating on how to apply novel data models, network technology and software tools that encompass the various topics covered in the class., 

class: INFO 5240
class title: Designing Technology for Social Impact
description: The social impact of technologies is typically thought about fairly late, if ever, in the design process. Indeed, it can be difficult at design time to predict what effects technologies will have. Nevertheless, design decisions can inadvertently "lock in" particular values early on. In this course, we will draw on science &amp; technology studies, technology design, and the arts to analyze the values embodied in technology design and to design technologies to promote positive social impact. What social and cultural values do technology designs consciously or unconsciously promote? To what degree can social impact be "built into" a technology? How can we take social and cultural values into account in design?

class: INFO 5301
class title: Ethics in New Media, Technology, and Communication
description: This course examines moral and ethical issues in communication, new media, and technology. Using theories and research in moral philosophy and psychology, we examine how people perceive and reason about ethical issues presented by media and technology, and how moral action is influenced by cognitive, emotional, and ethical belief systems. Issues of autonomy, transparency, harm, privacy, manipulation, justice, democracy, equality, and care are discussed. We analyze the consistency between personal and professional ethics, the importance of moral character and agency, and the translation of moral thought to ethical action, and address the development of professional and personal ethical codes of conduct and research for communication professionals in the areas of new media and technology.
outcome: Students will be able to increase awareness of moral and ethical issues in media, technology, and communication., Students will be able to explain moral psychology and ethical principles., Students will be able to examine moral reasoning and ethical responsibilities—both personal and professional—that affect people and society., Students will be able to examine issues and implications of ethical relativism and ethical principles., Students will be able to reason thoughtfully and ethically about current cases and news items in communication, media, and technology., 

class: INFO 5303
class title: Privacy in the Digital Age
description: This course introduces students to privacy technologies and surveys the current state of digital privacy from multiple perspectives, including technology, law, policy, ethics, economics, and surveillance.

class: INFO 5310
class title: Psychological and Social Aspects of Technology
description: This course explores the psychological and sociological foundations of communication and information technology. The course focuses on the theories from the cognitive, behavioral and social sciences that play a role in understanding people's use of, access to and interactions with information and communication technologies. The course will examine multiple levels of analysis – individual, social, and social systems/communities – and present multiple disciplinary perspectives. The course will also provide a high-level view of methodologies used in the behavioral and social sciences.

class: INFO 5321
class title: Introduction to Rapid Prototyping and Physical Computing
description: This class provides an introduction to modern rapid prototyping techniques such as laser cutting, 3D printing and microcontroller programming (such as the Arduino system). Using these tools, small multidisciplinary groups conduct the hardware project of their choice exploring topics as varied as: Universal Access, tangible interfaces, toys, personal or medical assistants and new musical instruments.

class: INFO 5340
class title: Virtual and Augmented Reality
description: This course presents an introduction to virtual and augmented reality technologies, with focus on fundamental principles from 3D math, human perception, graphics, and interaction. Concepts from the contributing fields of computer vision, computer graphics and human computer interaction will be introduced in the context of virtual and augmented reality. Students will be tasked with creating their own virtual or augmented reality application as a course project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: intermediate programming ability in C# or other object-oriented lagnuages. Familiarity with 3D game engines or strong desire to learn. Basic linear algebra.

class: INFO 5355
class title: Human Computer Interaction Design
description: This course focuses on user experience design (UX) and the life cycle of interface design from the user perspective. We will discuss key aspects of the human-centered design process: understanding, analyzing, and formalizing user needs, exploring possible design solutions to address user needs, creating prototypes to externalize design ideas, and evaluating the usability of these prototypes. 
 
outcome: Students will be able to appraise the human-centered design cycle and human-computer interaction design concepts., Students will be able to build practical skills required to apply the human-centered design process in technology design through class activities and a semester-long project., Students will be able to design a user interface in a semester-long project, including interim milestones that walk the students through the specific stages of the design process., Students will be able to develop teamwork skills through a semester-long group project., 

class: INFO 5356
class title: Introduction to Human-Robot Interaction
description: Robots are making their way into our everyday lives, working across several applications including in people's home, healthcare, and retail settings. As these systems become more integrated into our lives, it is important that they are designed to be useful, functional, and socially acceptable; however, this remains a key challenge for the field of human-robot interaction (HRI). This is a project-based course that covers core computational, engineering, and social challenges and approaches for effective HRI in human-centered environments. Topics include perception of people, computational HRI, design in HRI, coordination and collaboration, and experimental robotics. Students should expect to learn about seminal research in HRI, gain hands-on experience with physical mobile robots, and implement systems for real-time interaction with users.

class: INFO 5360
class title: Healthcare Organization and Delivery
description: The goal of this course is to educate students about the complexity and nuances of healthcare delivery. The course will be especially useful for non-clinicians who intend to go into fields that will require a detailed understanding of healthcare. Class sessions will analyze healthcare, so that students learn to identify tensions in healthcare and opportunities for improvement. Students will come away from the course with a deeper appreciation of why it is difficult to change healthcare. They will then be able to anticipate the intended and unintended consequences of interventions and policies that they and others might implement.

class: INFO 5370
class title: Applied Data Science: Decision-Making Beyond Prediction
description: This course considers the data science challenges beyond training an accurate predictive model, especially for systems about people (data of behavior), and for people (deployed models to influence behavior). Whether for online marketplaces, transportation, governmental, or urban systems, effective data science in such settings requires dealing with user incentives and strategic behavior, networked and decentralized decision-making, and privacy and ethics concerns. Primary evaluation will be through programming based assignments (in Python) and conceptual questions.
outcome: Articulate common challenges in data science about and for people., Design, develop, and deploy data science models that effectively deal with such challenges., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: ENGRD 2700, CS 1380, or equivalent, and experience programming in Python. Recommended corequisite: INFO 5430 or CS 5785.

class: INFO 5410
class title: Urban Systems
description: Social scientists such as sociologists, economists, and anthropologists, as well as policymakers seek to better understand cities, in order to answer important theoretical questions, such as: what is a city in the first place; how does a city grow; what is a better city (and who is it better for); and (how) can we create and/or develop better cities. This course provides an integrative introduction to these disciplinary perspectives on cities so students acquire an overview of the key systems, processes, and technologies that must be managed, operated, and maintained in any urban center. The goal of the class is to unpack the complex interplay among institutions, markets, and citizens in the context of the financial, political, administrative, and legal policies that exist in urban communities so that students can understand urban systems in a holistic manner. We will deploy the lenses of three defining cornerstones of urban environments - institutions; real estate; and mass transit - to examine the management of cities and conflicts that arise within them, the design and use of public spaces and infrastructure, and the relationship between the public and the private spheres. The course pedagogy is a mix of participatory learning in the classroom and field visits/labs and expert lectures. The course will equip students with the conceptual and analytical tools necessary to ensure equitable, sustainable, and financially and politically viable approaches to urban challenges. It is primarily designed for students interested in working for a city, or in starting, working at, advising, or financing for-profit or not-for-profit ventures operating in the urban technology and innovation space.

class: INFO 5430
class title: Urban Data
description: This course provides a broad overview of the opportunities and challenges related to urban data and helps familiarize students with key datasets and the tools and methodologies to visualize and analyze them.
outcome: Discover relevant open data datasets to answer questions related to a given urban data issue., Think critically about new kinds of urban data in terms of collection, storage, and processing; students will also be able to assess issues related to privacy and bias., Ingest, process and visualize urban data including tabular data, GIS data or graph data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 5410.

class: INFO 5431
class title: Teams and Technology
description: This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of research, design, and management of teams whose work and interactions are influenced by technology. Key questions that are addressed include: How does technology influence teamwork? How do we design technology to support teamwork? How do we build effective teams and team interactions for teams that work face to face or online? To address these questions the course will draw primarily from literature in organizational behavior, social psychology, design and human computer interaction. Group exercises will be used to actively build teamwork and team-leadership skills. Topics will include group effectiveness, human robot teamwork, group composition, computer supported collaboration, conflict, group dynamics, temporal issues in groups, geographically distributed teams, and measurement issues of group dynamics and performance.

class: INFO 5505
class title: Computing and Global Development
description: To date, most computing technologies have primarily benefited urban, affluent, and literate people in developed regions by empowering them with more information, resources, and agency. These technologies currently exclude billions of people worldwide, such as rural residents, people with disabilities, and indigenous communities, who are too poor to afford modern devices, too remote to be connected, or too low-literate to navigate the mostly text-driven Internet. In recent years, researchers and practitioners have examined how computing technologies can be designed or appropriated to empower such underserved communities. This course introduces students to the field of Information and Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD). Through discussions of case studies from the Global South, students will study how computing technologies are used in different global development domains, such as agriculture, finance, health, social justice, and education. They will gain understanding of socio-economic, cultural, and political forces that impact technology adoption in low-resource environments and will learn to design, build, and evaluate inclusive technologies to empower marginalized people.​

class: INFO 5556
class title: Business Intelligence Systems
description: This course covers the fundamental technical and organizational concepts and challenges related to the development of Business Intelligence Systems, a key component crucial to the competitiveness of a wide range of organizations. Topics covered include: data profiling, dimensional data modeling, data transformation, metadata systems, data governance, data delivery options, and an overview of emerging technologies in this space. Course is comprised of interactive lectures, work/lab sessions, and a substantial team project.

class: INFO 5600
class title: AI for Healthcare
description: With the rise in the availability of clinical and behavioral data in the world, artificial intelligence (AI) is now increasingly applied in the field of healthcare. Researchers are working on using AI in different spheres of the healthcare process ranging from understanding of the human behavior, early diagnoses of medical conditions and even recommendations for personalized treatment procedures. Physicians are using machine learning algorithms on clinical images for early detection of cancer. Researchers have shown that smartphone sensor data can be used to detect events like opioid overdose and enable just-in-time interventions to save lives. Psychologists are mining data from social networks to detect mental health conditions. This project based course will introduce the students to these next generation AI based healthcare systems and will focus on the design and implementation of these systems for the real world.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic knowledge of machine learning, deep learning techniques and coding experience.

class: INFO 5900
class title: MPS Project
description: Independent research for Master of Professional Studies students.

class: INFO 5905
class title: Professional Career Development
description: This course will focus on career development topics specifically for MPS Information Science students. Through a series of discussions, activities, and guest speaker lectures, students will further develop career success strategies with an emphasis on personal strengths, networking, communication, and professional branding. By the end of the course, students will be able to identify and articulate to prospective employers, their unique interface between computing and the world.

class: INFO 5910
class title: Revolutionary Technologies
description: The goal of this course is to help students deepen their theoretical and historical perspective on social change and the relationship between social change and technology. We will read a range of revolutionary thinkers including, but not limited to, Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Antonio Gramsci, Stuart Hall, Mahatma Gandhi, E.F. Schumacher and Frantz Fanon. We will study their theories of revolution and the underlying tensions within the division of labor in society, and discuss the role that technology can play in forming and reforming these social relations. We will use this as a lens to reflect both upon existing technology and the underlying relations that create and sustain it, as well as to envision new technological possibilities supported by (and supporting) alternative forms of human organization. Coursework will consist of significant reading, regular reading reflections, design exercises and a final course project.

class: INFO 5920
class title: Specialization Project for Connective Media, Health Tech, and Urban Tech
description: All students of the Jacobs Institute are required to complete a two-semester Specialization research project. We offer two Tracks for completing this requirement. * Track 1 Specialization projects are conducted in small teams on topics suggested and supervised by researchers at Cornell Tech or Weill Cornell. Track 1 students register for 4 credits of INFO 5920 in their first year Spring semester, as well as 4 credits of INFO 5920 in their second year Fall semester. * Track 2 Specialization project topics can be defined by the student; so long as they are 'anchored' with a 3-credit approved-elective course, and reviewed for program relevance by the INFO 5920 instructor. Track 2 students register for 3 credits of their anchor elective course and 1 credit of INFO 5920 during their first year Spring semester. Track 2 students register for 4 credits INFO 5920 in their second year Fall semester. In general, Specialization projects result in tangible, concentration-relevant deliverables in the form of prototypes, analyses, research studies, and/or publications, which become a sharable part of the student portfolio.
outcome: Work and solve open-ended problems., Demonstrate the ability to coordinate and work with a team., Apply technical knowledge and skills acquired from other program courses., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5901.

class: INFO 5940
class title: Special Topics in Information Science
description: Study of topics not currently covered in INFO offerings, as determined by faculty and student interest.

class: INFO 6310
class title: Behavior and Information Technology
description: This course explores the behavioral foundations of communication technology and the information sciences, and the ways in which theories and methods from the behavioral sciences play a role in understanding people's use of, access to and interactions with information and communication technologies.

class: INFO 6350
class title: Text Mining History and Literature
description: The course will introduce methods for computer-assisted analysis of historical text collections. It will cover corpus curation, representing text as data, building statistical models from text, and interpreting results. Statistical and programming concepts will be introduced as needed. The class will also reflect on how computational methods fit with existing practices in the humanities, and how we can use models as complements to our own interpretations. Following the course, students will be able to assist faculty in computer-assisted scholarship.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: INFO 6010 or permission of instructor.

class: INFO 6410
class title: HCI and Design
description: Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and design theory and techniques. Methods for designing, prototyping, and evaluating user interfaces. Basics of visual design, graphic design, and interaction design. Understanding human capabilities, interface technology, interface design methods, prototyping tools, and interface evaluation tools and techniques.

class: INFO 6500
class title: Language and Technology
description: Examines how new communication technologies affect the way we produce and understand language and modify interaction with one another. Focuses on the collaborative nature of language use and how Internet technologies affect the joint activities of speakers and listeners during the construction of meaning in conversation.
outcome: Demonstrate a detailed understanding of theoretical perspectives, through careful reading and discussion of class materials., Apply theories and methods from class to research projects., Demonstrate organizational and collaborative skills through group research projects., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2450/INFO 2450 or permission of instructor.

class: INFO 6520
class title: Human Computer Interaction Graduate Studio
description: This course will introduce User Experience design technique taught in a Studio. Students will work on a series of design studies and a semester long design project exploring advanced User Interaction design techniques. The course is designed to help students start a design portfolio to reflect their work.

class: INFO 6610
class title: Text and Networks in Social Science Research
description: This is a course on networks and text in quantitative social science. The course will cover published research using text and social network data, focusing on health, politics, and everyday life, and it will introduce methods and approaches for incorporating high-dimensional data into familiar research designs. Students will evaluate past studies and propose original research.
outcome: Learn to critically evaluate empirical research that uses text as data or social network analysis., Connect fundamentals of research design to high-dimensional data analysis., Develop verbal and written skills via in-class discussion, presentations, and written assignments., Learn to represent complex relationships quantitatively and conduct high-dimensional data analyses using statistical programming., Learn methods for avoiding over-fitting in high-dimensional data analysis., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 6760 or GOVT 6029 or SOC 6020 or equivalent.

class: INFO 6620
class title: Social Research Design and Method
description: This graduate seminar is intended to acquaint students with critical issues in designing and executing social research. The goal of the course is to equip students to make their own analytically sound contributions to social research about technology, while critically considering their own roles as social scientists. Among the topics the course is likely to cover are: formulating good research questions and fitting appropriate methods to them; practical aspects of data collection; forms of validity; critical assessment of constructs and classifications; the roles of failure and surprise in social research; and positionality and the researcher's relationship to social policy.

class: INFO 6742
class title: Natural Language Processing and Social Interaction
description: More and more of life is now manifested online, and many of the digital traces that are left by human activity are increasingly recorded in natural-language format. This research-oriented course examines the opportunities for natural language processing to contribute to the analysis and facilitation of socially embedded processes. Possible topics include sentiment analysis, learning social-network structure, analysis of text in political or legal domains, review aggregation systems, analysis of online conversations, and text categorization with respect to psychological categories.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110 or equivalent programming experience, a course in artificial intelligence or any relevant subfield (e.g., NLP, information retrieval, machine learning).

class: INFO 6850
class title: The Structure of Information Networks
description: For description, see INFO 6850.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4820.

class: INFO 6940
class title: Special Topics in Information Science
description: Study of topics not currently covered in INFO offerings, as determined by faculty and student interest.

class: INFO 7060
class title: Digital Life Research Seminar
description: This seminar focuses on the societal perspectives on digital technology. Speakers will come from a range of disciplines including computer science, data science, engineering, OR, humanities, social sciences, law, and policy and will present work in progress that considers ethical and political questions related to the design, development, and deployment of digital, computational, and information systems and devices. Topics include accountable algorithms, bias in machine learning, AI and the workplace, privacy, and cybersecurity.

class: INFO 7090
class title: IS Colloquium
description: For staff, visitors, and graduate students interested in information science.

class: INFO 7900
class title: Independent Research
description: Independent research for MPS students and pre-A exam Ph.D. Students.

class: INFO 9900
class title: Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for post-A exam Ph.D. Students.

class: ITAL 1110
class title: Elementary Italian In Rome I
description: This introductory course provides a thorough grounding in all the language skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing, with practice in small groups.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ITAL 1113
class title: FWS: Writing Italy, Writing the Self: Jewish-Italian Lit and the Long 20th Century
description: The Jewish community of Rome is the oldest one in all of Europe, dating back to 200 B. C., and the authors of some of the most important twentieth century works of Italian literature are Jewish. In this course we will examine how some of these writers (Moravia, Bassani, Primo Levi, Carlo Levi, Ginzburg, Sereni, Bruck, Loewenthal, Janaczek, Elkann and Pipermo) have articulated the self against the background of the historical events that have shaped the past hundred years; two world wars and different social movements of the pre- and post- WWII eras. This seminar includes two film screenings.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ITAL 1120
class title: Elementary Italian In Rome II
description: This introductory course provides a thorough grounding in all the language skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing, with practice in small groups.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 1110 or equivalent.

class: ITAL 1201
class title: Italian I
description: ITAL 1201 is a fast-paced, introductory-level course, designed for students with no previous knowledge of Italian.  Students will be guided in developing four language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) in the context of everyday topics (school, housing, travel personal preferences, simple exchanges about past, future and possible events, etc.).  They will also be introduced to culturally acceptable modes of oral and written communication in Italian, some fundamentals of Italian history, and select current social and political issues.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ITAL 2110
class title: Italian Intermediate Composition and Conversation I in Rome
description: This is an all-skills course designed to improve speaking and reading ability, establish a groundwork for correct writing, and provide a substantial grammar review.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 1120 or equivalent.

class: ITAL 2130
class title: Italian Intermediate Composition and Conversation II in Rome
description: This course provides a review of composition, reading, pronunciation, and grammar review, as well as guided practice in conversation.  It emphasizes the development of accurate and idiomatic expression in the language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 2110 or equivalent.

class: ITAL 2201
class title: Italian III
description: An intermediate-level course that aims to further develop intercultural, reading, listening, speaking, and writing abilities.   Students will be guided in perfecting their communications skills, improving their cultural proficiency, and developing a critical eye toward printed and visual material drawn from literature, history, politics, arts in the Italophone world.  Conversation skills will be practiced in daily discussions and in individual or group projects and presentations.  A variety of written assignments will help students increase the range, accuracy, and stylistic appropriateness of their writing.  Review of  select grammar topics is part of this course, as is reading parts of contemporary novels.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 1202, ITAL 1401, LPI score of 49 or higher.

class: ITAL 2203
class title: Languages-Literatures-Identities
description: This course aims to introduce students to Italian literature mainly through readings in prose and poetry from the 20th and 21st century. The course includes significant practice in grammar, vocabulary building, and composition. Course Topic: Living Together in a multicultural society. Our principal reading will be Scontro di civiltà per un ascensore a piazza Vittorio, a 2006 award-winning novel by Algerian-Italian writer Amara Lakhous who came to Italy in 1995 as a political refugee; with this novel, he invites Italian readers to examine their 21st-century reality through the eyes of the immigrant.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 2201 or equivalent.

class: ITAL 2290
class title: Italian Mysteries
description: In this class we will trace the genre of the mystery story in Italy from Pinocchio (the mystery of who or what qualifies as a human being) through the 20th century across Italian art, literature, and cinema.  works by Carlo Collodi and Leonardo Sciascia will be featured along with classic cinema from Italy in order to answer a question that haunts Italian culture: who is the puppet and who is the master?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ITAL 2201 or permission of instructor required.

class: ITAL 3600
class title: Machiavelli, Yesterday and Today
description: This course, offered in Romance Studies in the Italian Section, is meant for students who have no prior knowledge of Machiavelli, political science, or for that matter the Renaissance.  It is both an introduction to one of the greatest political thinkers of the modern period, the father for many of what has come to be called political science, and a chance to reflect upon why it is that no thinker has been more cited or called upon in the last decade.  Whether it be on questions of populism or the effects of climate change how people are governed, Machiavelli seems to speak to us directly in ways that few others do.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ITAL 4190
class title: Special Topics in Italian Literature
description: Guided independent study of special topics.

class: ITAL 4290
class title: Honors in Italian Literature
description: Consult director of undergraduate studies for more information.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: ITAL 6224
class title: Beauty, Grief
description: This course is for anyone drawn to beauty-and anyone who, within the beautiful, finds the trace of a loss. What do we grieve, what do we miss, when we find ourselves in the presence of beauty? And what, in every retrospective, prospective or otherwise non-present beauty, do we nonetheless crave and nonetheless mourn? What is the beauty hidden within mourning? We'll take a look at thinkers, poets, and artists from both modern and premodern culture, potentially including Anne Carson, Augustine of Hippo, Fra Angelico, Gillian Rose, Hervé Guibert, Pepe Espáliu, and others, as we try to sit with dual summons of beauty and grief: beauty or grief.

class: ITAL 6270
class title: Dante's Commedia
description: In this seminar, dedicated to a close reading of Dante's Commedia (1321), we will consider how Dante's poem explores such issues as: the search for language adequate to convey experience surpassing human comprehension; the creation of a narrating "I"; the education of the reader; the relation between truth and enterprise; the redemptive potential of art (and its ability to deceive as well as to enlighten and console): the call to bear witness, both to life and to loss.

class: ITAL 6390
class title: Special Topics in Italian Literature
description: Guided independent study for graduate students.

class: JAPAN 1101
class title: Elementary Japanese I
description: Gives a thorough grounding in all four language skills-speaking, listening, reading, and writing-at the beginning level. The laboratory provides explanation, analysis, and cultural background. Daily lectures are conducted entirely in Japanese.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: JAPAN 2201
class title: Intermediate Japanese I
description: This course provides widely applicable language proficiency as an integrated Japanese course, which develops all four language skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing) at the post-elementary level.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of C+ or higher in JAPAN 1102 or equivalent as determined through placement exam and permission of instructor.

class: JAPAN 3301
class title: High Intermediate Japanese I
description: For students who have learned basic Japanese skills and would like to develop higher skills in reading, writing, speaking, and listening.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of C+ or above in JAPAN 2202 or placement by instructor during registration.

class: JAPAN 4401
class title: Advanced Japanese I
description: Develops reading, writing and oral communication skills at the advanced level.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of C+ or above in JAPAN 3302 or placement by instructor during registration.

class: JPLIT 6625
class title: Directed Readings
description: Students choose a faculty member to oversee this independent study. The student and the faculty member work together to develop class readings.

class: JPLIT 6627
class title: Advanced Directed Readings
description: Guided independent study for graduate students.

class: JWST 1101
class title: Elementary Modern Hebrew I
description: Intended for beginners. Provides a thorough grounding in reading, writing, grammar, oral comprehension, and speaking. Students who complete the course are able to function in basic situations in a Hebrew-speaking environment.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: JWST 1103
class title: Elementary Modern Hebrew III
description: Sequel to HEBRW 1101-HEBRW 1102. Continued development of reading, writing, grammar, oral comprehension, and speaking skills.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of Hebrew or permission of instructor.

class: JWST 1987
class title: FWS: Jews on Film: Visible and Invisible
description: Why were Jews virtually invisible in films produced during the Hollywood's "golden age"? Is this a surprise, given the leading role played by American Jews in founding the studio system? Writing about the films studied in this course will help students situate and interpret the presence (and absence) of characters identifiable as Jews in Hollywood films released from the silent era through the present. We will view approximately six films in their entirety and study excerpts from others. Films to be studied in whole or part may include: The Immigrant, The Jazz Singer, The Great Dictator, Casablanca, The Apartment, Funny Girl, Annie Hall, Barton Fink, and A Serious Man. Students will write film analyses, review essays, reflective responses, and explorations of contextual material. Readings from film studies and popular journalism will situate these films within the historical, cultural, and industrial contexts in which they were produced.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: JWST 2001
class title: Russian Jews and Jewish Russians in Literature and Film
description: Explore the ways of 19th to 21st century Russian Jewry through survey of literature and film. Learn about life in Russia from the perspective of Jewish and Russian-Jewish writers as well as through portrayal of Russian Jews in works of prominent Russian authors in the context of period. Selected works of Pushkin and Chekhov, Gogol and Sholom Aleichem, Pasternak and Yevtushenko will help create a multidimensional picture of the political and socio-cultural environment in which processes of integration and assimilation, both imposed and impeded by the state, shaped the identity of the modern-day Russian Jews in their deep, inherent connection to the Russian culture and often complicated relationship with their roots, which characteristically distinguishes them from their American contemporaries.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2276
class title: Intermediate Yiddish
description: Intended for intermediate students, this is the third in a three-course sequence, designed to enable students to meet the College of Arts &amp; Sciences language requirement. Students will increase their understanding of the language in cultural context and will further develop their capacity to produce both spoken and written Yiddish.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: JWST 1777 or permission of instructor.

class: JWST 2467
class title: Holocaust in History and Memory
description: This course explores the history of the Holocaust during which the Nazis murdered six million Jews. Topics covered in this class include the history of antisemitism in Europe and twentieth-century Germany, the origins and rule of the Nazis, the politics of World War II, the Final Solution and extermination camps, Jewish literary responses to the Holocaust, among other topics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2488
class title: Israel: History, Culture, Society
description: This course is an introductory survey to various aspects of Israeli culture, society, and history. Through a close examination of various media (film, music, literature) as well as key events and social and political facts, students explore a range of phenomena related to Israeli social practices and its political system, alongside a chronological overview of changes in Israeli culture and society over time. Topics covered may include geography, immigration, demographics, inequality, Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Hebrew language, gender, literature, film, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2522
class title: Drinking through the Ages: Intoxicating Beverages in Near Eastern and World History
description: This course examines the production and exchange of wine, beer, coffee and tea, and the social and ideological dynamics involved in their consumption. We start in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, and end with tea and coffee in the Arab and Ottoman worlds. Archaeological and textual evidence will be used throughout to show the centrality of drinking in daily, ritual and political life.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: JWST 2580
class title: Imagining the Holocaust
description: How is the memory of the Holocaust kept alive by means of the literary and visual imagination? Within the historical context of the Holocaust and how and why it occurred, we shall examine major and widely read Holocaust narratives that have shaped the way we understand and respond to the Holocaust. We also study ethical and psychological issues about how and why people behave in dire circumstances. We shall begin with first-person reminiscences—Wiesel's Night , Levi's Survival at Auschwitz, and The Diary of Anne Frank—before turning to realistic fictions such as Kineally's Schindler's List (and Spielberg's film), Kertesz's Fateless, Kosinski's The Painted Bird, and Ozick's "The Shawl." We shall also read the Kafkaesque parable of Appelfeld's Badenheim 1939 and the fantastic cartoons of Spiegelman's Maus books as well as W.G, Sebald's Austerlitz. We shall conclude with several episodes of the acclaimed 2009-2017 French TV series A French Village.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2599
class title: Medicine, Magic and Science in the Ancient Near East
description: This course explores the history of medicine and other sciences in the ancient Near East, broadly defined. In addition to medicine, the other scientific disciplines covered in this course include mathematics, astrology, astronomy, alchemy, zoology, among others. Geographically, the course traces the transmission of scientific knowledge in ancient Babylonia, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, and beyond. As such, the course offers students a tour of different ancient civilizations and corpora. Students read selections from cuneiform Akkadian tablets, Egyptian Christian Coptic spellbooks, rabbinic sources such as the Talmud, among many other works. At the same time, students will be required to critically engage recent scholarship in the history of science and medicine as a way to help frame their analyses of the ancient materials. The course interrogates how ancient civilizations transmitted and received scientific knowledge, as well as the relationship between what we today tend to call science, medicine, magic, and religion. This course is intended not only for students in the Humanities and Social Sciences, but also for those majoring in science or medicine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: JWST 2697
class title: History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
description: This course examines the history of the conflict between two peoples with claims to the same land (Palestine/Israel), from the rise of their national movements at the turn of the 20th century and their eventual clash down to the present crisis. We will investigate the various stable and shifting elements in the evolution of the conflict including conflicting Israeli and Palestinian narratives and mythologies about the nature of the conflict. Among many issues to be addressed are: the relationship of this conflict to the history of European colonialism in the Middle East, the emergence of Pan-Arabism and Islamism, the various currents in Zionism and its relationship to Judaism, the implication of great power rivalry in the Middle East, the different causes and political repercussions of the four Arab-Israeli wars, efforts at peacemaking including Oslo and Camp David, and the significance of the two Palestinian uprisings.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: JWST 2724
class title: The Jewish Bible-Old Testament in Context
description: The Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) is a repository of ancient Israelite religious, political, social, historical, and literary traditions. For the modern reader these ancient traditions are often obscured by a focus on the text as revelation. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the biblical world by reading the Hebrew Bible in translation, on its own terms, as a body of literature that evolved in an ancient Near Eastern context. The Bible itself will be the primary text for the course, but students will also be exposed to the rich and diverse textual traditions of the ancient Near East, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, Moab, and Ugarit. In addition, this course will explore the impact of early biblical interpretation on shaping the monotheistic traditions inherited in the West. As participants in a secular course on the Bible, students will be challenged to question certain cultural assumptions about the composition and authorship of the Bible, and will be expected to differentiate between a text's content and its presumed meaning.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2754
class title: Wondrous Literatures of the Near East
description: This course examines Near East's rich and diverse literary heritage. We will read a selection of influential and wondrous texts from ancient to modern times, spanning geographically from the Iberian peninsula to Iran. We will explore a range of ancient myths of creation and destruction. We will also trace encounters with otherness in travel narratives. Together we will read and discuss such ancient works as the "The Story of Sinuhe" and "The Epic of Gilgamesh," as well as selections from the Hebrew Bible, New Testament and Qur'an. We will explore medieval works such as the "Travels" of Ibn Battuta, the "Shahnameh" of Ferdowsi, and "The Arabian Nights." We will also read Orhan Pamuk's My Name is Red, and Sonia Nimr's Wondrous Journeys in Strange Lands, as well as excerpts from Yochi Brandes's The Orchard. Students will also have the opportunity to research and analyze primary source materials in the collections of Cornell Rare Books and Manuscript Collection, and the Johnson Art Museum. All material is in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 2852
class title: Judaism and the Origins of Christianity
description: Most people think of Christianity as the "daughter religion" of Judaism. In this course, we will see that what we now know as Judaism and Christianity both claimed ownership of the same textual tradition and emerged together from the same set of historical circumstances, shaped by political crisis, a radical transformation of the social order and the challenge of Graeco-Roman culture. Through close reading of the principal sources of Christian literature, such as Paul's letters to the first communities of gentile "believers" and the accounts of the life and death of the messiah, known collectively as the gospels, we will explore how and why the followers of Jesus first came to think of themselves as the "New Israel" and how a polemical engagement with their controversial interpretation of Hebrew prophecy shaped the development of the rabbinic movement in Roman Palestine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: JWST 3101
class title: Advanced Modern Hebrew I
description: This constitutes the first course in our third year of the Modern Hebrew language sequence.  Development of speech proficiency will be emphasized. Over the course of the semester, students will develop reading comprehension through reading a variety of fiction and nonfiction texts, listening comprehension through screening of filmic works and episodes drawn from popular television series, writing through communication about what is read and screened, as well as more personal topics, and speech through in class discussion and oral presentations.  Readings will include authentic and partially adapted contemporary short stories, poems and newspaper articles.  
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: JWST 2100 with a grade equivalent to C- or above or permission of instructor.

class: JWST 3103
class title: Advanced Hebrew Through Media
description: This course is intended to continue the development of all aspects of Hebrew language skills. Emphasis, however, will be placed on speaking skills and understanding through the use of various outlets in Israeli media: television, film, online sources, newspapers, songs and literature. The use of text and media material relevant to Israeli contemporary society and culture will help the students to gain better understanding of Israeli society and culture.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: JWST 3102 or permission of instructor.

class: JWST 3411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 3539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: JWST 3711
class title: Sitcom Jews: Ethnic Representation on Television, 1948-Present
description: Jews have been on TV since the beginning of the medium – over 70 years – and have made decisions about how they are represented. What kind of Jews do we put on screen, and do they actually represent Jews in America? What about the representation of other ethnic and cultural groups? What can we learn from the history of Jewish television that might apply to Black, Latinx, Muslim, LGBTQ, Asian and other communities as they present themselves to the American public? "Sitcom Jews" uses media analysis, theoretical discussion, and student writing to examine a huge range of TV, starting with classic sitcoms ("The Goldbergs" (1948), "All in the Family, and "Bridget Loves Bernie"), continuing through current Jewish TV shows ("Broad City", "Transparent", "Curb Your Enthusiasm"), and adding a range of ethnic television ("The Jeffersons", "Black-ish", "Insecure", "Ramy", "Will &amp; Grace", "Never Have I Ever").
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 3720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground.  We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 4013
class title: Antisemitism in the Courts and in Jurisprudence
description: Antisemitism, a deep-seated prejudice against Jews, is seeing a global revival. The most brutal U.S. instance was the 2018 Tree of Life Synagogue massacre, where Robert G. Bowers, an active anti-Semitic online poster, took 11 lives. Tried in 2023, he was condemned to death for his crimes. As emphasized by Assistant U.S. Attorney Soo C. Song, Bowers was driven by his belief that Jews are "a cancer upon the planet." Bowers' trial was only the most recent in a series of trials and judicial proceedings, both in the U.S. and internationally, that had antisemitism at their core in a myriad of ways. This course examines various manifestations of antisemitism in law and jurisprudence, from 19th century Europe to early 20th century America to Nazi Germany and the Stalinist U.S.S.R. to the present. Among the topics covered are blood libel trials, the Dreyfus affair in France, the Leo Frank trial in Georgia, the defamation case against Henry Ford, the Nazi Nuremberg laws, the annihilation of European Jews as the core of the crimes against humanity charge at the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, and contemporary proceedings charging a hostile anti-Semitic environment at certain U.S. colleges and universities under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

class: JWST 4196
class title: From the Bible to the Museum: Jewish Memory and Public History
description: How has the remembrance of the past shaped the evolution of Jewish religion, identity, and culture from Biblical times to the present? How have the creation, dissemination, and preservation of Jewish memory changed over time? How is Jewish history used in political discourse in contemporary society in the U.S. and around the Globe? How can the historical tools be utilized to generate a sophisticated and discerning public engagement with the complexities of the Jewish past? In this course, students will explore these questions through seminar discussions, attending, evaluating, and critiquing exhibits and cultural events and watching films that put Jewish history on display, and by deploying their own research, writing, and creative skills to produce public facing final projects or a traditional research paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 4533
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 4673
class title: Vienna and the Birth of the Modern
description: This course takes Vienna's history as a starting point for studying how the modern mind fought to liberate itself from a past deemed overly burdensome, while embracing radical innovation and change. Students will develop a sense of the city's role as a laboratory of twentieth-century ideologies and ideas: liberalism and conservatism, Zionism and anti-Semitism, modernism and traditionalism. Most of the course's key themes will converge on what contemporaries referred to as 'the Jewish question,' a problem which most characters we will examine engaged with to some extent. Assigned readings will include texts by Arthur Schnitzler, Sigmund Freud, Theodor Herzl, Joseph Roth, Robert Musil, and Ludwig Wittgenstein.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 4769
class title: Research in Jewish Studies
description: This course offers Jewish Studies majors a chance to write a significant research essay that allows for depth of study of a topic of interest to each individual student. Because it is a required course for the major, it is also intended to create a sense of community among majors and provide collective support for the students' research and writing. In this course, student research will be guided through individual meetings with the instructor as well as in-class writing exercises and peer review. Students will develop research and writing skills, including library research, bibliographies, drafts, art of argument, and rewriting. The course will be designed in a way that allows students to conduct research that is of interest to them, regardless of what that field of interest is.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 4998
class title: Honors Research I
description: The first half of a two-semester sequence for Jewish Studies majors who wish to conduct research for an honors thesis. In this class, student research will be guided through individual meetings with the instructor as well as in-class writing exercises and peer review, and students will develop research and writing skills, including library research, bibliographies, drafts, art of argument, and rewriting. The course will be designed in a way that allows students to conduct research that is of interest to them, regardless of what that field of interest is. In the first semester of this sequence, weekly readings of the course are designed to expose students to a variety of scholarly approaches in the field of Jewish Studies. In the second semester, students will create a detailed bibliography that is aimed at more specific expertise in the subject matter at hand. The second semester will conclude with a lengthier research paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: JWST 6411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.

class: JWST 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: JWST 6673
class title: Vienna and the Birth of the Modern
description: This course takes Vienna's history as a starting point for studying how the modern mind fought to liberate itself from a past deemed overly burdensome, while embracing radical innovation and change. Students will develop a sense of the city's role as a laboratory of twentieth-century ideologies and ideas: liberalism and conservatism, Zionism and anti-Semitism, modernism and traditionalism. Most of the course's key themes will converge on what contemporaries referred to as 'the Jewish question,' a problem which most characters we will examine engaged with to some extent. Assigned readings will include texts by Arthur Schnitzler, Sigmund Freud, Theodor Herzl, Joseph Roth, Robert Musil, and Ludwig Wittgenstein.

class: JWST 6720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground. We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender. 

class: JWST 7533
class title: The Lower East Side: Jews and the Immigrant City
description: American Jews have frequently been touted as a "model minority." This course will take a more critical look at the historical interactions between Jewish immigration, United States industrialization, and processes of social and geographical mobility—all through the prism of New York's Lower East Side, first home for over 750,000 Jewish immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe, the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere between the mid-19th century and the 1920s.  We will compare the Jewish experience to that of other immigrants/migrants by considering social institutions as well as material and other cultural practices. We will examine interactions with the built environment —most especially the tenement—in Lower East Side culture. Special attention will be paid to immigrant labor movement politics including strikes, splits, and gender in the garment trade. From the perspective of the present, the course will examine how commemoration, heritage tourism and the selling of [immigrant] history intersect with gentrifying real estate in an "iconic" New York City neighborhood. Projects using the ILR's archives on the Triangle Fire and other topics are explicitly encouraged. This course counts as an out of college elective for B. Arch and M. Arch students.

class: KHMER 1100
class title: Elements of Khmer Language and Culture
description: This course will introduce basic Khmer/Cambodian language and culture to anyone with interest in the subject matter, those planning to travel to Cambodia, heritage students, etc.

class: KHMER 1121
class title: Elementary Khmer I
description: Gives a thorough grounding in speaking and reading.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: for beginners or those placed in course by examination.

class: KHMER 2201
class title: Intermediate Khmer I
description: Continuing instruction in spoken and written Khmer. Intermediate level of reading Khmer.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: KHMER 1122.

class: KHMER 3301
class title: Advanced Khmer I
description: Continuing instruction in spoken and written Khmer; emphasis on enlarging vocabulary, increasing reading speed, and reading various genres and styles of prose.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: KHMER 2202 or equivalent.

class: KHMER 4431
class title: Directed Study
description: Intended for advanced language study.

class: KOREA 1101
class title: Elementary Korean I
description: Designed for students with no or very little knowledge of Korean in order to acquire the 4 skills (listening, speaking, reading and writing) of the Korean language and to become familiar with its culture. Students will learn the Korean writing system and basic survival language skills. Basic knowledge of Korean grammar, vocabulary, expressions and cultural points will be given during the lab. Students will then have an opportunity to practice the learned knowledge in lectures. By the end of the semester, students will be able to engage in simple conversations with native Koreans on subjects familiar to them such as, introducing oneself, describing events or objects in the present and past, asking for and giving directions to and from certain places, talking about future plans, etc.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: KOREA 1109
class title: Elementary Korean Reading and Writing I
description: Designed for Korean heritage students who already have some level of speaking and listening competence in Korean, but have limited linguistic proficiency of reading and writing. The course first introduces basic conversational and grammatical structures and idiomatic expressions. It will then focus on speaking, reading and writing skills through short stories, essays and Korean folktales. Students will be able to create a dialogue regarding topics such as greetings, leave-taking, campus life, Korean language class, daily life, and life in Seoul.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: online placement test (collt.lrc.cornell.edu/) is required.

class: KOREA 2201
class title: Intermediate Korean I
description: Designed for intermediate learners of Korean. Students will achieve a higher level of communicative competence through practicing the target language in a wide range of speech events. Specifically, students will compare and contrast cultural differences, describe their own experiences and events, discuss opinions on various topics and participate in speech events. Students will command a lengthy discourse regarding various topics such as weather and seasons, clothing and fashion, travel, public transportation, shopping and life in Korea.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B- or higher in KOREA 1102 or online placement test (collt.lrc.cornell.edu/).

class: KOREA 2209
class title: Intermediate Korean Reading and Writing I
description: Designed for the Korean heritage students who can understand and speak Korean, but especially need to refine their reading and writing skills. Students will acquire concrete knowledge of grammar to use in everyday conversation, will be able to read passages faster, and will minimize their spelling errors in writing, through frequent discussion and composition about Korean culture, society and history. They will become confident in reading paragraph-length readings in Korean, be able to write their reflections on the passages that they have read, and speak with ease when participating in the classroom discussions. Various projects will enhance students' overall linguistic and intercultural competence. Korean typing skill is required.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B- or higher in KOREA 1110 or online placement test (collt.lrc.cornell.edu).

class: KOREA 3301
class title: High Intermediate Korean I
description: Designed for high intermediate learners of Korean. It aims to help students achieve high levels of language proficiency by introducing a wide range of authentic reading materials. The course provides students with reading materials from writings in various genres and styles such as newspaper editorials, columns, essays, short stories, and other literary writings. Students will discuss and write an essay on topics regarding living in Korea, popular Korean food, dating culture in Korea, tour sites and regional products, Korean wave, address terms and interpersonal relations, and famous Korean people.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B- or higher in KOREA 2202 or KOREA 2210, or online placement test (collt.lrc.cornell.edu/).

class: KOREA 4401
class title: Advanced Korean I
description: Designed for students who have completed the intermediate level of Korean, to acquire advanced language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing) through Content-Based Instruction and Project-Based Language Learning. Students will gain profound knowledge in various fields on Korea through discussion and composition: current issues in Korean society, Korean people's thoughts and mind, tradition, history and culture. With frequent discussions and compositions on various contemporary news articles, medical drama series, and documentaries, students are encouraged to become Intercultural Communicative Citizens and learn the contents through the language. The expected student outcome is to gain confidence in the academic level of discussions and compositions by critical thinking and analyzing. Korean typing skill is required.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: grade of B+ or higher in KOREA 2210 or KOREA 3302, or online placement test (collt.lrc.cornell.edu/).

class: LA 1410
class title: Grounding in Landscape Architecture I
description: Introduction to the representation and design of landscapes and to working in a studio setting. Uses freehand drawing, measured drawing, digital tools and model making to understand design principles of the landscape within a cultural and ecological paradigm.  This course receives more credit than typical for the meeting pattern due to substantial work outside of instructional hours.
outcome: Develop facility with graphic drawing and representation in plan, section, elevation, electronically and in analog formats., Create perspective, plan and isometric drawings at elementary to intermediate levels of skill., Demonstrate use of analytical representation using two and three-dimensional formats., Design in response to social/ecological programs presented at an introductory level., Integrate skills though a series of design and graphic assignments., 

class: LA 2010
class title: Medium of the Landscape I
description: Studio course emphasizing the design process and principles involved in organizing and giving form to outdoor space to create site-specific design.
outcome: Students will become familiar with and gain confidence in the design process as a method for solving site design problems., Students will be able to create conceptual designs through site inventory and analysis, program generation and conceptual diagrams., Students will develop graphic and computer skills to clearly communicate their design intent., Students will be able to refine concepts into spatially defined, well-formed schematic designs., 

class: LA 3010
class title: Integrating Theory and Practice I
description: The studio engages students in the design process based on a site defined by significant cultural and natural conditions. The studio focuses on peripheral, yet complex sites of coastal cities, where the urbanizing force has not been strong or continuous enough in order to completely occupy or transform the maritime and/or fluvial ecosystems. The sites involved will be often related to industrial or infrastructural abandonment and will include relevant underdeveloped, fragmented open spaces that interact both with the natural systems and the city. The scarcity of water and a broad design history of the area are key conditions of the site's location and the design approach. The landscape approach here operates as  new humanistic lens that seeks to offer better habitat conditions for a wider range of species.
outcome: Students will become prepared to address complex urban situations through the specificity of Landscape Architecture, thus to propose sustainable future scenarios for landscapes in a process of change and/or abandonment through enhancing the fragmented and unrevealed qualities of the site., Students will be instructed to address the complexities of the area, especially be defining their own strategy and site to implement it.  The instructor will guide them to always relate their particular design to their global strategy that comprises a broader area., Students will become familiar with the local urban design history and design agenda through lectures and their own conducted research., Students will be encouraged to apply already-learned multi-layered site analysis skills and furthermore, to take a critical stance on the assemblage of data; also develop a creative use of complementary interpretive concepts such as the fragment, the frontier, or the interstice that work as vehicles for a concrete, process-based and material design approach in all scales., Students will be offered systematic help in order to explore the realities and representations at a distance, stimulating them to original, rigorous, and design-oriented representations., Students will be oriented towards good practice on semiarid coastal and fluvial conditions at an international level by establishing a rigorous and systematic knowledge on projects., Students will be instructed to evolve conceptual design protocols that fit to the ecologies of the semi-arid/Mediterranean landscape., Students will gain familiarity and confidence with the design scale, evolving skills in grading by controlling its spatial consequences through precise and dynamic models., Students will expand graphic and computer skills to clearly communicate strategies, design ideas, spatial qualities, and management requirements for their landscape design in time., 

class: LA 3160
class title: Site Engineering
description: This course exposes students to the fundamentals of site engineering and its relationship to best environmental practices. Lectures and short vignettes are provided to students and "worked-through" within the class period. These projects deal with site grading, earthwork estimating; storm water management, site layout, and essential associated professional skills. This course receives more credit than typical for the meeting pattern due to substantial academic activity outside of instructional hours.
outcome: Identify landforms and understand the three-dimensional qualities of landscape and how those qualities directly affect the designs that you create., Understand the correct terminology, concepts and conventions used by Engineers, Landscape Architects and Contractors to achieve the desired built outcomes., Prepare basic site grading plans to enhance their designs., Complete calculations related to soil estimation and storm-water management., Layout a landscape design on site., 

class: LA 4010
class title: Urban Design Studio
description: This studio focuses on the integration of theory and practice in landscape architecture at the urban scale. Urban design methods, morphology, and strategies are introduced and design and planning concepts applied to city-scaled projects including community engagement. Students are engaged in contemporary urban design strategies and methodologies on real-life projects in a metropolitan area.
outcome: Students will become familiar with and gain confidence in the design process as a method for solving site planning problems., Students will gain the ability to identify, analyze, and evaluate on-site and adjacent systems (both natural and man-made) and their interactions., Students will be able to develop conceptual designs through three-dimensional models and quick sketches., Students will be able to expand conceptual design models into spatially defined and refined site plans., Students will develop graphic and computer skills to clearly communicate design intent., 

class: LA 4030
class title: Directed Study: The Concentration
description: Working with their advisor, students create a written and visual document that describes the concentration intent.

class: LA 4830
class title: Seminar in Landscape Studies
description: Topical lecture series and seminars with a different subject and method each time it is offered. Students enrolled in the graduate version of the course (LA 5830) will submit written responses to the presentations given, evaluating the content delivered and reflecting on how it impacts their own sense of the design disciplines.
outcome: Students will become familiar with a variety of topics that span the full range of landscape architecture theory and practice today., Students will gain experience building landscape theory through critical discussion of topical lecturers., 

class: LA 4910
class title: Creating the Urban Eden: Woody Plant Selection, Design, and Landscape Establishment
description: Focuses on the identification, uses, and establishment of woody plants in urban and garden settings. By understanding the environmental limitations to plant growth, students are able to critically assess potential planting sites; select appropriate trees, shrubs, vines, and ground covers for a given site; and learn about the principles and practices of site amelioration and plant establishment. Design followed by written specifications and graphic details are developed to implement these practices. No prior design experience necessary. This course receives more credit than typical for the meeting pattern due to substantial academic activity outside of instructional hours.
outcome: Students will gain a first-hand understanding of the heterogeneity of urban and other growing conditions and how these various conditions might influence plant selection, growth, development and survival., Students will develop observation techniques, practice nomenclature and recognize plant characteristics necessary for the identification of deciduous plants in leaf., Students will learn site assessment techniques and analytical skills necessary to diagnose various site conditions and determine how to use this information in planting design and associated detailing., Students will be able to select site-appropriate plant materials and demonstrate technically how to develop plans and construction documents for contractor bidding and installation., Students will learn new transplanting techniques and have an opportunity for hands-on practice., Students will be able to integrate theory with practice by working on site-specific projects., 

class: LA 4940
class title: Special Topics in Landscape Architecture
description: Topical subjects in landscape architectural design, theory, history, or technology. Group study of topics not considered in other courses.

class: LA 4960
class title: Internship in Landscape Architecture
description: In this course, students participate in an experiential learning opportunity relevant to the student's focus of study or career goals in landscape architecture. A Landscape Architecture faculty member must serve as supervisor and complete the term grade report. Specific learning goals for the experience are arranged by the student with their internship faculty supervisor and the internship host prior to the start of the internship. All internship courses must adhere to the CALS Internship Guidelines.
outcome: Become familiar with various design phases, from initial conception to implementation, either from the students' own experience in the office or via mentors and team members., Describe design thinking as a cyclical process of negotiation between often conflicting interests., Understand the role of collaboration within a professional office., Evaluate the experience acquired regarding major contributions of Landscape Architecture in terms of creating environments that are sustainable, bio-diverse and just., Explain how different methods within the same design process affect decision making and the quality of the outcome., 

class: LA 4970
class title: Individual Study in Landscape Architecture
description: Work on special topics by individuals or small groups.

class: LA 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduates experience through actual involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of department faculty members.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught.

class: LA 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Permits outstanding undergraduates to carry out independent research in landscape architecture under academically appropriate faculty supervision. Research goals should include description, prediction, and explanation, and should generate new knowledge in the field of landscape architecture.

class: LA 5010
class title: Composition and Theory I
description: Introduction to landscape architectural design through a series of course modules that engage students in discovering, knowing and engaging the full potential of the landscape medium. In this process-oriented studio students will develop design proposals for real and imagined sites drawing on knowledge and principles from art, aesthetics, science, nature and culture. Each module sequence will also be integrated with the companion LA 5050 course and emphasize the unfolding and emergent nature of designerly thinking, making and doing.
outcome: Students will gain an introductory understanding of the meaning(s), language and vocabulary of landscape through direct engagement and experience in observing, recording, assessing, and designing landscape sites that are both real and imagined. In addition, students will be exposed to historical and contemporary design theories and practices through such things as lectures, readings, films, excursions, and field trips., Through design exercises students will learn how to creatively work with the expressive medium of landscape by using aesthetics, time, space, form, composition, architecture, narrative, ecology, plants, landform, climate, hydrology, culture, and phenomena, to name a few., Students will gain an introductory understanding of landscape architecture as an act of placemaking – wherein the relationship between people and their environment is activated, integrated, and enhanced., Students will learn and practice habits of collaboration, critical inquiry and reflection that are integral to the design process and to studio culture. Large and small group critiques, written and group reflection exercises, collective projects and activities, and studio discussions and dialogues will all be part of creating a supportive and interactive learning environment and studio culture., Students will learn and practice the landscape architectural design process as a set of integrated, enfolding and unfolding design acts involving site selecting; site investigating, assessing, evaluating, analyzing; site programming and planning; site structuring, ordering, functioning; site imagining and representing and; site constructing., While being exposed to specific design methods and strategies, students will be supported and encouraged to probe and discover their own creative voice and approach to landscape architectural design based on their individual interests, background, values, and perspectives., Student will learn how to conceive and represent persuasive landscape architectural design proposals and solutions in the form of carefully crafted drawings and models and well considered written and verbal presentations., Through integrated design and representation exercises and projects, students will learn how the acts of landscape seeing, representation, and making continually interrelate and inform one another., 

class: LA 5050
class title: Graphic Communication I
description: This course introduces students to landscape architectural representation and teaches conventions such as basic drafting and orthographic drawing (plan, section, axonometric) alongside freehand drawing, collage, modeling, photography and digital representation.  Assignments will be fully integrated with the projects being undertaken in the companion Studio Course LA 5010 emphasizing the seamless interplay of landscape architectural design with the activities of drawing, making and representation through which it is conceived and visualized.
outcome: Students will learn, practice and develop habits of drawing and representation that are integral to their ongoing learning, growth and development as a designer. Generative and iterative drawing, orthographic drawing, drafting, modeling, mapping, diagramming, analysis and concept drawing, photography, collage, modeling, and ideation drawing will be among the drawings types practiced., Students will learn how to conduct, record and translate field observations and measurements on landscape sites into site basemaps, plans, and sections., Students will learn how to graphically compose, organize, and present well-conceived visual design presentations that persuasively represent their designs in poster, portfolio, and web-portfolio formats. Their learning will include a basic introduction to Creative Suite programs including In-Design, Photoshop, and illustrator., Students will learn how to digitally prepare, upload, size, store, and secure their graphic work for presentation and portfolio purposes., Students will learn and practice critical evaluation of landscape representation process and products– their own and those of their peers– through group critiques, peer review, and reflection/evaluation sessions., Students will gain a basic understanding of the historic and contemporary way that the theory and practice of landscape representation has reciprocally influenced the theory and practice of conceiving and creating constructed landscapes. This understanding will be achieved through readings, lectures, and visits to Cornell archive and museums collections., Students will learn how to access and use an array of landscape representation resources including books, articles, mapping resources, digital collections, on-line graphic tools, etc., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: LA 5010 or permission of instructor.

class: LA 5090
class title: Master of Professional Studies Research Design Studio
description: The MPS Research Design Studio provides MPS students in Landscape Architecture with foundational knowledge in design research theories, methods and tools through readings and discussion, research problem framing and weekly meetings to discuss project process.

class: LA 5830
class title: Seminar in Landscape Studies
description: Topical lecture series and seminars with a different subject and method each time it is offered. Students enrolled in the graduate version of the course (LA 5830) will submit written responses to the presentations given, evaluating the content delivered and reflecting on how it impacts their own sense of the design disciplines.
outcome: Students will become familiar with a variety of topics that span the full range of landscape architecture theory and practice today., Students will gain experience building landscape theory through critical discussion of topical lectures., Graduate students will submit written responses to the presentations given, evaluating the content delivered to reflect on how it impacts their own sense of the design disciplines., 

class: LA 5910
class title: Creating the Urban Eden: Woody Plant Selection, Design, and Landscape Establishment
description: Focuses on the identification, uses, and establishment of woody plants in urban and garden settings. By understanding the environmental limitations to plant growth, students are able to critically assess potential planting sites; select appropriate trees, shrubs, vines, and ground covers for a given site; and learn about the principles and practices of site amelioration and plant establishment. Design followed by written specifications and graphic details are developed to implement these practices. No prior design experience necessary. This course receives more credit than typical for the meeting pattern due to substantial academic activity outside of instructional hours.
outcome: Students will gain a first-hand understanding of the heterogeneity of urban and other growing conditions and how these various conditions might influence plant selection, growth, development, and survival., Students will develop observation techniques, practice nomenclature and recognize plant characteristics necessary for the identification of deciduous plants in leaf., Students will learn site assessment techniques and analytical skills necessary to diagnose various site conditions and determine how to use this information in planting design and associated detailing., Students will be able to select site-appropriate plant materials and demonstrate technically how to develop plans and construction documents for contractor bidding and installation., Students will learn new transplanting techniques and have an opportunity for hands-on practice., Students will be able to integrate theory with practice by working on site-specific projects., 

class: LA 5960
class title: Graduate Internship in Landscape Architecture
description: In this course, students participate in an experiential learning opportunity relevant to the student's focus of study or career goals in landscape architecture. A Landscape Architecture faculty member must serve as supervisor and complete the term grade report. Specific learning goals for the experience are arranged by the student with their internship faculty supervisor and the internship host prior to the start of the internship. All internship courses must adhere to the CALS Internship Guidelines.
outcome: Become familiar with various design phases, from initial conception to implementation, either from the students' own experience in the office or via mentors and team members., Describe design thinking as a cyclical process of negotiation between often conflicting interests., Understand the role of collaboration within a professional office., Evaluate the experience acquired regarding major contributions of Landscape Architecture in terms of creating environments that are sustainable, bio-diverse and just., Name the major components of decision making through design thinking iterations., Explain how different methods within the same design process affect decision making and the quality of the outcome., Contextualize the office's/company's practice and compare its major contribution toward knowledge building to excellent awarded professional work., 

class: LA 5970
class title: Graduate Individual Study in Landscape Architecture
description: Work on special topics by individuals or small groups.

class: LA 5980
class title: Graduate Teaching
description: Designed to give qualified students experience through involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of faculty members. The experience may include leading discussion sections, preparing, assisting in desk critiques, and presenting lectures. There are assigned readings and discussion sessions on education theory and practice throughout the semester.

class: LA 6010
class title: Integrating Theory and Practice I
description: This studio focuses upon urban, site-scaled projects that consider significant cultural landscapes. The course explores theories of urban design strategies, sustainable design, and landscape representation. These are explored through a semester-long project that is derived from specific site and place. The integration of site history as well as contemporary urban condition is explored that supports an understanding and relationship between theory and practice.
outcome: Students will become familiar with and gain confidence in the design research as a method for solving urban planning problems., Students will gain the ability to identify, analyze, and evaluate on-site and adjacent systems (both natural and man-made) and their interactions., Students will be able to develop conceptual designs through three-dimensional electronic models and site-based diagrams., Students will be able to expand conceptual design models into spatially defined and refined urban plans., Students will develop graphic and computer skills to clearly communicate design intent., 

class: LA 6030
class title: Directed Study: The Concentration
description: Working with their advisor, students create a written and visual paper that documents the concentration intent.

class: LA 6160
class title: Site Engineering
description: This course exposes students to the fundamentals of site engineering and its relationship to best environmental practices. Lectures and short vignettes are provided to students and "worked-through" within the class period. These projects deal with site grading, earthwork estimating; storm water management, site layout, and essential associated professional skills. This course receives more credit than typical for the meeting pattern due to substantial academic activity outside of instructional hours.
outcome: Identify landforms and understand the three-dimensional qualities of landscape and how those qualities directly affect the designs that you create., Understand the correct terminology, concepts and conventions used by Engineers, Landscape Architects and Contractors to achieve the desired built outcomes., Prepare basic site grading plans to enhance their designs., Complete calculations related to soil estimation and storm-water management., Layout a landscape design on site., 

class: LA 6900
class title: Methods of Landscape Architectural Inquiry
description: This course provides to students an introduction to research methods, especially those related to the field of Landscape Architecture and Urban Design.  It builds on the theoretical foundations provided in LA5900 and reinforces the students understanding of how landscape research and analysis is carried out.  The seminar proposes to learn about the most prominent methods of landscape research by "exposing" them to one of the most fragile, dynamic and desired landscapes at today's world: the coast.  Moreover, understanding the coast as a landscape of desire and conflict will help students to critically engage with what we think as an "objective research methodology".  The course will engage with concrete sites, preferably at the coast of the United States, where present and future habitation as well as tourism (leisure) patterns are antagonic to climate change scenarios.
outcome: Introduce students to different research methods and critically engage with the assessment of their intrinsic capacity for providing knowledge., Students will learn on coastal dynamics and by the means of their own research they will become able to assess different solutions that respond to climate change scenarios., Students will get introduced to the history of coastal tourism, the geographies and economies of tourism and they will become familiar with specific terminology employed by the tourist sector., Students will learn about site specific coastal designs that are innovating the fields of tourism, coastal management and Landscape Architecture., Students will improve their representation techniques by employing software they already know (GIS, Rino, Illustrator, etc.) as well as learning video software and montage techniques to apply their inquiry., 

class: LA 6910
class title: Design of Landscapes
description: Introductory survey of the history and theory of planned human intervention in the material environment.  Critical themes, sites, and conditions across time, space, and scale, from the paradise garden to the contemporary megacity, are explored through weekly topical lectures, creative exercises, discussions, readings, and essays. Course culminates in an individual research project.
outcome: Acquire knowledge of foundational approaches to the history and theory of formal and informal landscapes., Learn to interpret past and present landscapes as primary records of human values, practices, and institutions., Develop skills of theorization and argumentation through written and visual assignments., Explore how investigation of past design is part of the trajectory toward innovative future landscapes., 

class: LA 6940
class title: Special Topics in Landscape Architecture
description: Topical subjects in landscape architectural design, theory, history, or technology. Includes group study of topics not considered in other courses.

class: LA 7010
class title: Urban Design and Planning
description: This studio explores the application of urban design and landscape urbanism techniques to the problems and opportunities of contemporary city making. The studio investigates the social, cultural, natural, and infrastructural systems of urban environments, and develops integrated spatial design strategies involving water quality, public space, and flooding infrastructure. The course introduces three-dimensional computer modeling and digital design media as tools for urban design.
outcome: Develop a disciplinary literacy through landscape history, theory and contemporary practices., Demonstrate ability to engage landscape as community at urban scales through complex programs and design approaches., Students shall be able to develop 3-dimensional digital models at advanced level of skill., Students shall be able to collect and assess data related to urban communities., 

class: LA 8900
class title: Master's Thesis in Landscape Architecture
description: Independent research, under faculty guidance leading to the development of a comprehensive and defensible design or study related to the field of landscape architecture. Work is expected to be completed in final semester of enrollment.

class: LATA 1210
class title: Elementary Quechua I
description: 1210-1220 is an introductory sequence that allows students to develop basic fluency in Quechua, the most widely spoken indigenous language in the Americas. Students learn elements of Quechua's phonetics, vocabulary, morphology and syntax through an interactive approach and gain awareness of regional and dialectal differences. The course focuses on oral and written skills, with emphasis on tasks based on familiar contexts of use. It also introduces learners to the history, culture and geography of the Andes through exposure to cultural practices, proverbs, folklore, and artefacts of the region (e.g. textiles). Students will reflect on Quechua as an endangered language and on the significance of keeping this very popular indigenous language of Latin America alive.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: LATA 1951
class title: Foreign Policy as Subversion
description: To what extent does the ideal of the US as a vanguard for democracy and freedom in the world match up with other aspects—military, economic, and humanitarian—of US foreign policy? This same question about the degree to which discourses and practices correspond might be asked of other countries, like the Soviet Union, China, and Britain, but this course examines the ways in which US foreign policy has been deployed over the course of the twentieth century and the ways those policies have been perceived and received by people living in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Particular case studies will be addressed stemming from the faculty's specializations (for example, Vietnam, Cambodia, Guatemala, and Chile) and the emphasis is on the role of the United States in Latin America and Southeast Asia. Prominent themes will include forms of subversion, from military muscle to economic coercion, and how and why they have changed over time; meanings of liberty, democracy, freedom, and sovereignty in different places and times; popular responses to policies and actions of foreign administrations; the relationships between sovereign states and transnational corporations; the uses and abuses of History in the formulation and justification of policy initiatives and in local responses to them; and the complexities involved in discerning internal and external forces in an increasingly transnational world.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: LATA 2055
class title: Race and Slavery in the Early Atlantic World
description: The legacies of slavery remain all too obvious in the modern Atlantic World. From demographic imbalances to pervasive social and economic inequality, much of the recent past has involved addressing that destructive early modern heritage. This course traces the roots of slavery and race in the Atlantic World from 1400 to 1800. Through lectures, readings, and class discussion, we will examine how politics, culture, gender, and the law intersected to shape the institution of slavery and the development of conceptions of race. As an Atlantic World course, we will take a comparative perspective and ask how different imperial regimes (Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English) fostered different systems of race and slavery in the Americas. We will also ask how the law as a lived experience, gender norms, and imperial politics all worked to shape the production of racial hierarchies.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: LATA 2170
class title: Early Modern Iberian Survey
description: This course explores major texts and themes of the Hispanic tradition from the 11th to the 17th centuries. We will examine general questions on literary analysis and the relationship between literature and history around certain events, such as medieval multicultural Iberia, the creation of the Spanish Inquisition in the 15th century and the expulsion of the Jews in 1492; the encounter between the Old and the New Worlds; the 'opposition' of high and low in popular culture, and of the secular and the sacred in poetry and prose. Readings may be drawn from medieval short stories and miracle collections; chivalric romances, Columbus, Lazarillo de Tormes, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Calderón, and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095 , or CASE Q++.

class: LATA 2252
class title: Diasporas from the Spanish Caribbean
description: This seminar examines the Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican diasporas in the United States. We will examine US relations with these three countries; the root causes of this Caribbean migration; their history in particular urban areas of the United States; and the political, social, and cultural issues that have attracted attention.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: LATA 3010
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: LATA 3290
class title: Comparative Politics of Latin America
description: This course is designed as an introduction to political, economic, and social issues in 20th century Latin America. Topics are organized chronologically, beginning with the crisis of agro-export economies and oligarchic rule in the 1930s, the onset of state-led development and mass politics in the 1930s and 40s, the military takeovers and revolutionary struggles of the 1960s and 70s, patterns of democratization and market liberalization in the 1980s and 90s, and the recent experience with populist and leftist governments in much of the region. Among the main issues covered are populism and corporatism, dependency theory and import-substitution industrialization, different patterns of authoritarian rule, social movements and revolution, democratic breakdowns and transitions, the debt crisis and market reforms, and U.S.-Latin American relations. Throughout the semester, we will draw on examples from the entire region, but focus on paradigmatic national cases. Knowledge of Spanish or Portuguese is not required.
 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: LATA 3609
class title: Brazilian Ensemble - Deixa Sambar
description: Deixa Sambar performs several styles of samba, Brazil's national music. Members need not have prior background in music-making, but a good sense of rhythm is desirable. Members include students as well as Ithaca community members, brasileiros as well as newcomers to Brazilian culture. Rehearsals develop playing skills, with a deep emphasis on cultural understanding of this vital, community-based music.

class: LATA 3613
class title: Cornell Steel Band
description: The Cornell Steel Band explores the wide variety of music for an orchestra of instruments fashioned from 55-gallon oil drums, and an "engine room" of non-pitched percussion. Interwoven into the focus on hands-on practice is reflection on the meanings of steel band, historically and in the present, in its native Trinidad and Tobago and here in the United States. Formal musical training is not necessary, though a sense of rhythm and a good ear are helpful.

class: LATA 4000
class title: Contemporary Issues in Latin - Latino America
description: Interested in Latino Studies and Latin American Studies? This course will explore topics in Anthropology, Art, Economics, History, Literature, Government, Sociology, etc., of US Latino and Latin American contexts. Course features guest speakers from Cornell and other institutions.

class: LATA 4250
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: An introduction to belief systems in ancient Mexico and Central America, emphasizing the blending of religion, astrology, myth, history, and prophecy. Interpreting text and image in pre-Columbian books and inscriptions is a major focus.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LATA 6000
class title: Contemporary Issues in Latin-Latino America
description: Interested in Latino Studies and Latin American Studies? This course will explore topics in Anthropology, Art, Economics, History, Literature, Government, Sociology, etc., of US Latino and Latin American contexts. Course features guest speakers from Cornell and other institutions.

class: LATA 6020
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: LATA 7250
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: Explores the ways Mesoamericans understood the world and their place in it, and the ways they constructed history as these are reflected in the few books that have survived from the period before the European invasion. Examines the structure of writing and systems of notation, especially calendars, and considers their potential for illuminating Mesoamerican world views and approaches to history. Primary focus is detailed analysis of five precolumbian books: Codex Borgia, a central Mexican manual of divinatory ritual; Codex Boturini, a history of migration in central Mexico; Codex Nuttall, a Mixtec dynastic history; and two Maya books of astrology and divination, Codex Dresden and Codex Madrid.

class: LATIN 1201
class title: Elementary Latin I
description: Introductory course designed to prepare students to start reading Latin prose at the end of a year. The class moves swiftly and includes extensive memorization of vocabulary and paradigms; study of Latin syntax; and written homework, quizzes, tests, and oral drills.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: LATIN 1205
class title: Intermediate Latin I
description: Introduces students to reading original Latin text. Covers complex syntax and reviews the grammar presented in LATIN 1202, LATIN 1204.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LATIN 1202, LATIN 1204 or placement by departmental exam.

class: LATIN 2203
class title: Catullus
description: The hundred or so carmina we have of Catullus (c. 87 – c. 57 BC) continue to influence poets and critics today. Their timelessness makes us forget that they were composed in time, a greater understanding of which helps us to understand what makes them timeless. By engaging Catullus' poems actively in the original Latin, we will appreciate their historical, cultural, and poetical context and the impact it has had on their enduring appeal.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LATIN 2201, or placement above LATIN 2201 on departmental exam.

class: LATIN 3220
class title: Rapid Reading in Latin
description: Topic: Tacitus' Annales.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one 2000-level Latin course. 

class: LATIN 3286
class title: Independent Study in Latin, Undergraduate Level
description: May be taken upon completion of one semester of work at the 3000-level. To be taken only in exceptional circumstances. Must be arranged by the student with their advisor and the faculty member who has agreed to direct the study. To be approved by the DUS.

class: LATIN 5211
class title: Elementary Latin I
description: Introductory course designed to prepare students to start reading Latin prose at the end of a year. The class moves swiftly and includes extensive memorization of vocabulary and paradigms; study of Latin syntax; and written homework, quizzes, tests, and oral drills.

class: LATIN 5215
class title: Intermediate Latin I
description: Introduces students to reading original Latin text. Covers complex syntax and reviews the grammar presented in LATIN 5212, LATIN 5214.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LATIN 5212, LATIN 5214, or placement by departmental exam.

class: LATIN 5223
class title: Catullus
description: The hundred or so carmina we have of Catullus (c. 87 – c. 57 BC) continue to influence poets and critics today. Their timelessness makes us forget that they were composed in time, a greater understanding of which helps us to understand what makes them timeless. By engaging Catullus' poems actively in the original Latin, we will appreciate their historical, cultural, and poetical context and the impact it has had on their enduring appeal.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LATIN 5221, or placement above LATIN 5221 on departmental exam.

class: LATIN 5230
class title: Rapid Reading in Latin
description: Topic: Tacitus' Annales. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one 5220-level Latin course.

class: LATIN 6201
class title: Advanced Readings in Latin Literature
description: Topic: Semantics of prose.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduates must have had two semesters of 3000-level Latin.

class: LATIN 6216
class title: Advanced Latin Prose Composition
description: This advanced Latin prose composition course is for graduate students.

class: LATIN 7262
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: LATIN 7920
class title: Independent Study in Latin
description: Independent study for graduate students only.

class: LAW 3281
class title: Constitutional Politics
description: This course investigates the United States Supreme Court and its role in politics and government. It traces the development of constitutional doctrine, the growth of the Court's institutional power, and the Court's interaction with Congress, the president, and society. Discussed are major constitutional law decisions, their political contexts, and the social and behavioral factors that affect judges, justices, and federal court jurisprudence.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: LAW 4013
class title: Antisemitism in the Courts and in Jurisprudence
description: Antisemitism, a deep-seated prejudice against Jews, is seeing a global revival. The most brutal U.S. instance was the 2018 Tree of Life Synagogue massacre, where Robert G. Bowers, an active anti-Semitic online poster, took 11 lives. Tried in 2023, he was condemned to death for his crimes. As emphasized by Assistant U.S. Attorney Soo C. Song, Bowers was driven by his belief that Jews are "a cancer upon the planet." Bowers' trial was only the most recent in a series of trials and judicial proceedings, both in the U.S. and internationally, that had antisemitism at their core in a myriad of ways. This course examines various manifestations of antisemitism in law and jurisprudence, from 19th century Europe to early 20th century America to Nazi Germany and the Stalinist U.S.S.R. to the present. Among the topics covered are blood libel trials, the Dreyfus affair in France, the Leo Frank trial in Georgia, the defamation case against Henry Ford, the Nazi Nuremberg laws, the annihilation of European Jews as the core of the crimes against humanity charge at the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, and contemporary proceedings charging a hostile anti-Semitic environment at certain U.S. colleges and universities under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

class: LAW 4021
class title: Competition Law and Policy
description: This course will examine issues that arise when a country attempts to implement and maintain a "competition policy" as a way of promoting economic growth and efficiency. The basic reading material will start with actual cases (most of them arising under U.S. antitrust law), and use those cases to probe the legal, economic and broad policy issues that the cases raise.
outcome: This course examines, through the lens of economic analysis, legal principles drawn from various branches of law, including contracts, torts, and property. Cases are assigned for class discussion; in addition, there are exams and writing assignments. By the end of the course, students should be able to use basic economic analysis to better understand how the law does and should decide cases in various branches of law., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110 or its equivalent.

class: LAW 4330
class title: Environmental Law and Policy
description: Environmental law deals with some of today's most pressing challenges. In the fifty years since 1972, when the first World Conference on the Environment was held in Stockholm, and the US Clean Water Act was amended, the field of environmental law and policy has become increasingly sophisticated and complex. Regulation of environmental harms has long been a focus of governmental effort. Over the past half century, however, societies have come to recognize that they must adopt controls on pollution to protect the air, ground, water, atmosphere, and the natural world. Environmental law also increasingly touches on energy, agriculture, and land use law, and has expanded to include a focus on corporate law, international trade, environmental governance, environmental justice, sustainable growth and development, and climate change. In this course, we will look at the major statutes and policies used, at both the federal and state levels, to protect humans and the environment against exposure to harmful substances, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, CERLCA (Superfund), Resource Conservation &amp; Recovery Act, Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), and approaches to protecting endangered species and ecosystems. We will also examine the challenges of global atmospheric pollution, including ozone depletion and climate change. The class will look not only at the substance of these laws and policies, but also review common-law litigation, enforcement challenges, and the role of market mechanisms in addressing environmental issues. Students will become familiar with the history of environmental law and will analyze important landmark cases, as well as the hierarchy of laws, and jurisdictions that shape environmental law and policy. Students will apply their knowledge to real examples, with the goal of developing innovative legal solutions for the critical environmental challenges facing our world today.

class: LAW 5001
class title: Civil Procedure
description: An introduction to civil litigation, from commencement of an action through disposition on appeal, studied in the context of the federal procedural system. Also, a detailed consideration of federalism and ascertainment of applicable law; jurisdiction, process, and venue; and former adjudication.

class: LAW 5020
class title: Microeconomics for Management
description: Introduces microeconomic theory and applies it to problems faced by managers. Topics include supply and demand, consumer behavior, pricing when a firm has market power, and the role of contracts. The course employs a lecture format and emphasizes problem solving. Grading is based on quizzes, a midterm and a final exam.

class: LAW 5021
class title: Constitutional Law
description: A study of basic American constitutional law, including structural aspects of the Constitution and certain of its rights provisions.

class: LAW 5041
class title: Contracts
description: An introduction to the nature, functions, and processes of exchange, contract, and contract law. The course focuses on the predominant rules and principles governing contract and related obligation, including the substantive reasons underlying the rules and principles.

class: LAW 5081
class title: Lawyering
description: Lawyering is a full-year course designed to introduce first-year students to lawyering skills, with primary emphasis on legal writing, analysis, research, and oral presentations. Assignments are usually set in the context of a simulated law office (or judge's chambers). In the fall semester, students write predictive memoranda that point out the strengths and weaknesses of their client's case. To prepare the memoranda, students may need to determine the facts of the case by conducting interviews or depositions. Acting as junior attorneys, students will also make an oral presentation to a supervising attorney. The spring semester focuses on persuasive advocacy. Students prepare a memorandum, motion, or brief for submission to a court and, later, orally argue for their positions in a simulated court session. Throughout the year, students also learn the fundamentals of legal research. Instruction occurs not only in full-class sessions but also in individual conferences. Students receive extensive feedback on each major assignment.

class: LAW 5091
class title: Strategy
description: Among the critical tasks facing any senior manager are the creation, implementation, and evaluation of a business unit's strategy. This course seeks to provide the management student with the tools and frameworks essential to carrying out these tasks. Many of these tools and frameworks are based on recent advances in game theory, industrial organization, and organization theory, although the course also draws from the older business policy tradition. Students who successfully complete this course are able to analyze industries, identify areas of strategy advantage and disadvantage, and devise strategies that exploit advantages and remedy disadvantages.

class: LAW 5151
class title: Torts
description: An introduction to the principles of civil liability in the tort field: intentional wrongs, negligence, and strict liability. Attention is also given to the processes by which tort disputes are handled in our legal system.

class: LAW 5330
class title: Environmental Law and Policy
description: In this course, we will look at the major statutes and policies used to protect humans and the environment from exposure to harmful substances, including the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, CERLCA (Superfund), Resource Conservation &amp; Recovery Act, and approaches to protecting endangered species and ecosystems. We will also examine the challenges of protecting the global commons, including from ozone depletion, plastics pollution, and climate change. The class will look not only at the substance of these laws and policies, but also review common-law litigation, and issues with implementation and enforcement. Students will become familiar with the history of environmental law and will analyze important landmark cases, as well as the hierarchy of laws, and jurisdictions that shape environmental law and policy. Students will apply their knowledge to real examples, with the goal of understanding the possibilities and limits of legal and policy solutions to address the critical environmental challenges facing our world today.

class: LAW 6000
class title: Law In-Absentia Study
description: This course is for Law students who have been approved for one semester of in-absentia study at an ABA accredited law school.

class: LAW 6007
class title: Contracts for LLM Students
description: An introduction to the nature, functions, and processes of exchange, contract, and contract law. The course focuses on the predominant rules and principles governing contract and related obligation, including the substantive reasons underlying the rules and principles.

class: LAW 6009
class title: Constitutional Law for LLMs
description: This course introduces American constitutional law for students who are trained in other legal traditions. It covers structural aspects of the Constitution including the roles of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches, and the relationship between federal, state, and tribal governments. It also covers some of the Constitution's rights provisions.

class: LAW 6011
class title: Administrative Law
description: An introduction to the constitutional and other legal issues posed by the modern administrative state. Topics include: procedural due process, separation of powers, procedural modes of administrative policymaking; judicial review of agency action; and the oversight and control relationships between agencies and Congress or the President. The course provides a working familiarity with the fundamentals of administrative procedure, as well as a larger inquiry into the role of agencies in our constitutional system - and the effect of legal doctrine on shaping that role.

class: LAW 6027
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum
description: This course is offered to students interested in acquiring the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate campus disputes.
 
In the first segment of the course, students will be introduced to the guiding principles of mediation and restorative conferencing. A review of the theories of conflict, its roots and its resolution, set the stage for the role mediation and restorative conferencing can effectively play in resolving conflict.  Students are introduced to the models of mediation and the benefits and challenges of each, including a comparative analysis of evaluative, facilitative, transformative, and restorative justice styles of mediation. 
 
In the second segment, students will be assigned to mediate and facilitate cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards, as well as other campus partners.  The role of gender, race, culture, ethics and impasse in mediation will all be examined and incorporated into simulations and case studies.  
 
One full credit of this course will be dedicated to restorative justice and mediation experience outside of the classroom. Students will have several opportunities to apply their knowledge of mediation and restorative justice to acquire the skills necessary to become effective mediators and facilitators through on-campus student-based mediations and restorative processes. Following each case assignment, students will be required to provide a reflection and class presentation analyzing the nature of the complaint, the approach and techniques employed during the case and the student's evaluation of what worked and did not work in their attempt to resolve the conflict. Oversight will be provided by the course instructor.

class: LAW 6029
class title: Campus Mediation Practicum II: Advanced Issues in Restorative Justice
description: This course is offered to students interested in furthering their knowledge of the principles and practices of restorative justice. Students will also acquire the knowledge, skills and techniques necessary to mediate complex campus disputes. The course considers the needs and roles of key stakeholders (victims, offenders, communities, justice systems) and explores in depth the principles and values of restorative justice. It also identifies challenges to restorative justice - the dangers, the pitfalls – as well as possible strategies to help prevent restorative justice from failing to live up to its promise. Much of the course is organized around the issue of harm and crime within our legal system. However, students will also be exposed to restorative justice in multiple contexts, including issues in higher education.
outcome: Students will build on the knowledge gained in Campus Mediation Practicum I which sets the stage for the role restorative justice can effectively play in resolving conflict in multiple settings and environments., Students will be assigned to mentor CMP I student mediators as well as mediate complex cases referred to the Scheinman Institute from the Office of the Judicial Administrator and referrals from other Cornell University offices., Students will conduct research and write a paper exploring the global use of restorative justice programs in a wide variety of contexts., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRGL 4027 or ILRGL 6027 or LAW 6027.

class: LAW 6051
class title: Advanced Legal Research in Business Law
description: Business issues, particularly those relating to corporations, are a given in most areas of practice. This course will introduce students to online resources providing company information and will enable them to evaluate the information in order to determine whether the resource is the most appropriate for their research. Students will learn how to find what the company says about itself (required filings, annual statements, web pages, press releases), what third parties have to say (analysts, ratings services, directories, news and journal articles), insider information, and the regulatory background of company information. Classes are lectures in concert with outside assignments. There are assigned readings in lieu of a required textbook.  Students complete three assignments, and a due diligence report on a company of the student's choice. There is no final exam.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5081. 

class: LAW 6091
class title: Introduction to the American Legal System
description: Regular attendance of classes is required and will be monitored. The primary purpose of the course is to provide a survey and an analysis of the laws of the United States. It does this by exploring the basic foundations of American Law, its nature and theoretical underpinnings. Special emphasis is placed on principles in the American legal system that are distinctive and require particular attention from students who have been trained abroad. Among the topics to be covered by the course are the structure of the US court system; judicial review; the legislative system; federalism; separation of powers; consideration in contract; civil procedure; constitutional law; tort law, the common law; and criminal law. Students will also be instructed in some of the basics of American legal research. Class sessions consist of lectures and in-class discussions. Students are expected to participate in class discussions based on assigned readings. During the course students will be assigned at least two, short written exercises. The final requirement of the course will be a final examination.

class: LAW 6101
class title: Antitrust Law
description: The antitrust laws of the U.S. protect competitive markets and limit the exercise of monopoly power. Topics include: price fixing, boycotts, and market allocation agreements among competitors; agreements between suppliers and customers; joint ventures; monopolization; and mergers.

class: LAW 6105
class title: Deciphering DeFi: Legal, Governance and Economic Issues Facing Decentralized Finance Platforms

class: LAW 6111
class title: Arbitration Law and Practice
description: The field of alternative dispute resolution has virtually transformed the practice of law. Today, every lawyer has a professional responsibility to his or her clients to consider the most appropriate process available to resolve the issues. This course will explore the law and practice of arbitration as a process for the private adjudication of disputes. It is a hands-on participatory course which will examine arbitration as an alternative to litigation. Taught by professional arbitrators, the course is designed to comply with the experiential learning requirements of the American Bar Association's Council of the Section of Legal Education and Admissions to the Bar. The course will not only enhance the student's understanding of the arbitration process but will also improve his or her advocacy skills. Throughout the course, ethical issues, which are particularly significant in the dispute resolution field, will be considered.

class: LAW 6114
class title: Big Red Ventures
description: Big Red Ventures is Cornell's student-run venture fund. Founded in 2000 as a student project, BRV fund managers source new investment opportunities, conduct opportunity assessments and due diligence, make investment recommendations, assess and vote on recommendations of other fund managers, and make investments in early-stage, high-growth startup companies. Fund managers also manage existing portfolio investments, conduct annual portfolio valuations, and prepare investor materials such as an annual report and annual meeting. Fund managers operate under the guidance and oversight of experienced practitioner faculty. BRV is a selective program, with an application and interview process open to MBAs, JDs, and PhD candidates; the course is only open to students who apply to become and are selected as fund managers (see brventurefund.com for application details and timing). Full participation at either the Ithaca or Cornell Tech campuses, both fall and spring semester, is required.

class: LAW 6131
class title: Business Organizations
description: An introduction to the legal rules, principles, and economic factors that influence the governance of business enterprises in the United States. While the principal focus of the course will be the governance of large, publicly-traded corporations, we will also devote some attention to agency relationships, partnerships, and closely-held corporations. Legal topics will include business formation and capitalization, fiduciary obligations, shareholder voting, derivative suits, corporate control transactions, and the purpose of the firm.

class: LAW 6146
class title: AI Law and Policy
description: This course will examine the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) in several domains, and how regulators, legislators, and courts are addressing it. We will also focus on normative dimensions of the field of law and technology, and how they inform debates about automated decisionmaking and generative AI. We will begin with an overview of the methods and technologies encompassed by the generic term "AI" (including expert systems, big data, predictive analytics, machine learning, and generative AI), and will compare computational and legal thinking. To develop the concept of "computational thinking," distinctions between algorithmic and non-algorithmic thought will be explored. Since AI is based on data, we will examine data protection laws. To address public sector concerns, we will explore the virtues and limits of government use of AI, in areas ranging from benefits adjudication to criminal sentencing. The following topics may also be included: a) liability and reimbursement for health care AI, ranging from advanced clinical decision support to mental health apps to robotic caregivers; b) regulation of AI in finance; c) intellectual property and AI; d) military applications of AI, e) AI in employment, f) current controversies, including AI in the news. While the course will focus on US law, other jurisdictions' approaches will also be explored. Evaluation will be based on a final exam and class participation.

class: LAW 6161
class title: Comparative Law: The Civil Law Tradition
description: This course introduces students to the institutional and conceptual organization of "civil law" legal systems (which govern almost all of Western and Eastern Europe and Latin America, as well as significant portions of Africa and Asia). The course will therefore provide a broad overview of "civilian" private law and procedure, criminal procedure, administrative law, and constitutional law. The course is particularly interested in the differences between common law and civil law understandings of the relationship between law-making, legal interpretation, and the judiciary.

class: LAW 6193
class title: The Practice of International Arbitration
description: This course will examine the foundations of international arbitration, both commercial and investor-state, and discuss strategies for practicing in this field, including identifying applicable law, drafting effective arbitration clauses, selecting arbitral institutions and appointing arbitrators, gathering evidence, handling parallel proceedings, mediating settlements, requesting interim measures, and enforcing arbitral awards. Several classes will also turn specifically to investor-state arbitration (or "investment treaty arbitration"), a relatively new and revolutionary area of international adjudication that is growing in prominence. Through lectures and classroom simulations, the course will introduce students to the practice of international commercial and investment arbitration. 

class: LAW 6198
class title: Current Issues in Health Law and Policy
description: The course begins with a study of statutes, regulations, and cases concerning licensure, informed consent (to treatment), and liability. We also examine law and policy governing health care affordability and accessibility, including insurance coverage, and bioethical dimensions of health care. Having set the stage with these foundations of health law, the course will focus on the role of technology in varied settings of health policy, law, and regulation. These topics change year to year and may include: reimbursement levels set by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for new technology; quality analysis for Accountable Care Organizations and other Advanced Payment Models; calculation of medical loss ratios and other critical quantitative analysis for private insurers; quality measures for providers and hospitals; data analytics for public health measures; FDA assessments of drug safety and effectiveness; rankings and ratings of physicians and hospitals; statistical assessment of patterns of fraud and abuse; the role of data in Advanced Payment Models and other "pay for performance" alternatives to fee-for-service; the role of "middlemen" such as pharmacy benefit managers and group purchasing organizations in larger networks of health care finance; sampling cases for False Claims Act liability; proper information about outcomes for informed consent and reimbursement purposes; drug effectiveness and approvals; valuation of procedures via the resource-based relative value scale method; prior authorization for treatment; and COVID-19 data disputes. In many of these areas, we will consider the role of big data, AI, and machine learning in collecting, analyzing, and using health data.

class: LAW 6203
class title: First Amendment: Speech and Press Clauses
description: This course will survey interpretations of the speech and press clauses, including both court doctrines and theoretical understandings. Treatment of topics will vary from year to year. Current developments will be emphasized.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5021. Cannot be taken concurrently.

class: LAW 6204
class title: Advanced Cornell Prison Education Program Teaching Practicum
description: Students in the Practicum will co-teach a law-related course at either Auburn or Cayuga correctional facilities, as part of the Cornell Prison Education Program (CPEP), which offers college courses to inmates working toward their associates' degrees. Interested students should secure a full-time faculty advisor and submit a course proposal to the CPEP. Accepted students will design a detailed course syllabus, procure teaching materials, and teach a 2-hour class on a weekly basis. Students will also be expected to create, administer, and evaluate midterm and final examinations. Students must travel to and from a correctional facility on a weekly basis, at their own expense. Limited funds are available for teaching materials. Students who have secured a faculty advisor and who have received approval for their course from CPEP should direct inquiries about funding to the Associate Dean for Academic Affairs.

class: LAW 6205
class title: Cyber Enforcement, Regulation and Policy Analysis
description: This course will focus on analyzing government enforcement actions (both criminal and civil), regulations, and policies that seek to prevent cyber misconduct.  The course will cover a variety of areas, such as cyber threats to national security, economic espionage, hacking, fraud, initial coin offerings, cryptocurrencies, cybersecurity, and data breaches.  Students will hear directly from current and former enforcement officials, explore problems of public and private cyberspace regulation, and analyze how existing and emerging government cyber policies can impact technological innovation.

class: LAW 6241
class title: Federal White Collar Crime
description: This course introduces the criminal statutes and procedural rules most commonly used in prosecuting "white collar" crime.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5061.

class: LAW 6263
class title: Criminal Procedures - Adjudications
description: This course will primarily focus on the adjudication phase of the criminal process including: (1) the right to counsel, including the right to the effective assistance of counsel and conflict-free counsel; (2) the admissibility of incriminating statements; (3) charging, severance &amp; joinder, and pretrial detention; (4) the law of guilty pleas; (5) jury composition and selection; (6) fair trial procedures including rights afforded by the Confrontation, Double Jeopardy and Due Process Clauses; and (7) sentencing practice and procedure.

class: LAW 6266
class title: Critical and Strategic Thinking
description: Succeeding in any business leadership role requires you to think critically, and make quality decisions, even in the face of challenges such as imperfect/incomplete information, changing and unforeseen circumstances, and human nature in all of its complexity and unpredictability. Major content themes of this course focus on constructing a persuasive argument and deconstructing arguments made by others; recognizing and avoiding reasoning flaws and the forces that make us most susceptible to such flaws; approaching business problems systematically and thoroughly; and producing a problem solution that is (a) well-reasoned; (b) likely to be well-received by ultimate decision makers; and (c) able to be implemented successfully. 

class: LAW 6269
class title: Improv, Storytelling and Trial Advocacy
description: Effective trial lawyers must have the ability to creatively use facts to tell compelling stories in a fast-paced, live environment. Improv is the art of storytelling from the known facts developed during a live performance. In this course, students will develop trial advocacy skills by learning the fundamentals of improvisational theatre in an intense, focused, fun and safe setting. Improv strengthens core skills a trial lawyer must have: the ability to pay attention, listen, work with the given evidence, build on it and tell compelling stories. Once those techniques are introduced, students will perform improvised segments of a jury trial: voir dire, opening statement and closing argument, direct and cross examination.

class: LAW 6301
class title: Directed Reading
description: An examination of a topic through readings selected by arrangement between the instructor and an individual student or group of students (not exceeding eight).

class: LAW 6304
class title: Delivering Legal Services through Technology - Legal Tech Insights and App-Building Skills
description: This course helps Cornell Tech students understand what's happening in the rapidly transforming legal landscape – and be ready to help lead its evolution with both insights and practical skills. This intensive course has two components: (1) Legal Tech Insights: Weekly readings and corresponding guest speakers on legal tech trends; and (2) App Building Skills: Hands-on work developing expertise-automation apps using Neota Logic, a no-code software development toolset The course ends with a collegial competition among student teams who present their apps to a panel of judges.

class: LAW 6330
class title: Environmental Law and Policy

class: LAW 6401
class title: Evidence
description: The rules of evidence in civil and criminal cases with emphasis on relevance, hearsay, authentication, witnesses, experts, and confrontation. The course focuses on the Federal Rules of Evidence, with some attention to how they diverge from the common law.

class: LAW 6421
class title: Family Law
description: This course examines the regulation of intimacy, gender, and economics through the legal recognition and nonrecognition of domestic relationships. Specific topics include marriage, adult sexual relations outside of marriage, rules respecting property distribution and child custody upon divorce, parent-child relationships, inheritance and elder care, and adoption and foster care. Course materials draw upon statutes, judicial decisions, and model rules, as well as scholarship in history, social science, and feminist and queer theory. Our goal is to understand and critique how the state defines family.

class: LAW 6430
class title: Financial Markets and Institutions
description: This course presents an overview of the structure and function of the financial markets. The course attempts to provide a general working knowledge of the financial system by examining not only how various intermediaries and markets work, but also their evolution over time.  The role of central banks, and their operations, is particularly emphasized, as is the nature of risk management both within the financial institution and more broadly for the financial system. Topics considered here include swaps, credit derivatives, value at risk models, and systemic risk. Just as intermediation has moved from institutions to markets, the course follows a similar evolution in the topics studied over the course of the semester. Market topics examined include securitization, the Blockchain, digital currencies and the impact of fin tech on intermediation.

class: LAW 6432
class title: Federal Criminal Practice
description: The course will focus on federal criminal proceedings from a practice based perspective and will introduce students to the different stages of a federal criminal prosecution. Topics covered will include the initiation of a federal prosecution, bail and detention hearings, pretrial discovery and motion practice in federal criminal cases, litigating suppression motions, plea negotiation and federal sentencing practice and procedure. Participatory simulations requiring both oral and written advocacy will be incorporated into the curriculum.  

class: LAW 6433
class title: Ethics in Policing
description: This course will take an in-depth look into police practices and police officer misconduct; both on and off-duty. Topics will include alcohol and substance abuse, sexual and other misconduct, uses of force, race relations, hate crimes, and use of evolving technology. We will explore solutions and debate remedies in criminal law, civil law, and administrative disciplinary proceedings. Our goal is to structure and implement honorable and effective policing. Later in the semester we will devote a significant portion of class time analyzing the racial tensions inherent in the New York City Police Department's "stop and frisk" policy, the "broken windows" policing strategy, the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson Missouri, and the choke hold death of Eric Garner on Staten Island.
outcome: Analyze and debate the history, law, and public policy surrounding ethical and effective policing., Gain a better understanding how on and off-duty behavior, evolving technologies, uses of force, and race relations affect police legitimacy., Assess how municipalities, states, the federal government, courts, the public and other key interest groups examine police conduct in the context of crime reduction, technology, race relations, and other demographics., Formulate responses by courts, grand juries, and the federal Department of Justice to a variety of police conduct, policies, and tactics., 

class: LAW 6434
class title: Talmudic Legal Reasoning
description: The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the unique way that the Talmud approaches legal reasoning. We will consider a range of cases in the area of contracts, torts, employment, and inheritance, comparing and contrasting the way Talmudic scholars approach these cases with the way American case law has approached similar cases.

class: LAW 6441
class title: Federal Income Taxation
description: A basic course designed to develop understanding of tax concepts and ability to work effectively with the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, cases, and other tax materials.

class: LAW 6451
class title: Indigenous Peoples and American Law
description: The course will focus on the basics of Federal Indian Law, the ever-changing body of case and statutory law and treaties that define the limits and extent of Indian tribal sovereignty in the United States in the late twentieth century. The course will explore the nature and extent of tribal sovereignty at the time of European contact, the changing strategies of the United States in relating to tribes, and the lasting impact of those strategies on current-day tribal communities and their rights of self-government. The course will also explore the role of the United States in protecting tribal sovereignty and tribal resources. It will also examine the powers and jurisdiction of tribal governments with regard to both members and non-members of the tribe, as well as the lack or extent, as the case may be, of state jurisdiction over activities on Indian lands. Students will be encouraged to continually identify and question the legal, political and moral basis of the laws and policies that constitute Federal Indian Law in the United States today. We will also examine the current ALI restatement project for Federal Indian Law.

class: LAW 6461
class title: Financial Institutions
description: This course explores the economic functions, institutional design, and regulation of financial institutions. Beginning with conventional deposit-taking banks, the course examines the risks embedded within the business of banking, along with how regulation seeks to manage these risks. It then expands this framework to examine several other forms of 'non-bank' financial intermediation including investment banks, insurance companies, wholesale funding markets, structured finance markets, money market and other investment funds, and financial market infrastructure. The course also examines some of the related consumer/investor protection problems and how financial regulation seeks to address them.

class: LAW 6470
class title: High Growth Corporate Transactions
description: This course is designed to familiarize students with common issues that arise in, and how they are addressed by attorneys who structure, high-growth (principally start-up) corporate transactions. It will address that portion of the transactional practice not covered in Technology Transactions. A wide range of topics is expected to be covered, including: Choice of Entity; Founders' Agreement(s); Terms of Preferred Stock, including Liquidation Preferences and Conversion Mechanics; Basic Deal Structuring; Tax Issues/Benefits for Entrepreneurs/Startups; Employment and Incentive Considerations; Basic Securities Regulation; Convertible Notes and SAFEs; Series A Financing; Special Considerations with High Valuations and Unicorns; Distressed Situations and Down Rounds; Operational Agreements; Indebtedness; M&amp;A Transactions; and Initial Public Offerings.

class: LAW 6485
class title: Function of the General Counsel
description: The intention is to serve as a view of the general counsel function within a company.  A central objective of the course is to demonstrate the vital role of the general counsel in avoiding problems, solving problems that do occur, and fulfilling the central mission of the business or organization.

class: LAW 6509
class title: Immigration Federalism
description: This course explores the historical evolution of local, state, and federal government regulations of immigration, and the ways in which contemporary political conflicts over immigration express themselves as intergovernmental conflicts. Immigration is commonly understood as an exclusively federal area of law, in which the federal government has nearly unchecked power. But while this view of immigration's status in the U.S. federal system remains intuitive, it fails to capture the reality of immigration policymaking both past and present. From the earliest days of immigration regulation, states played a major role in deciding who can enter the country and what rights they hold once they arrive. Even in today's far more centralized immigration system, state and local policy has an important impact—both direct and indirect—on the legal status and daily life of immigrants. In a context where the relationship between state and federal governments is evolving in new directions, immigration federalism is likely to play an outsized role in defining the contours of policy conflicts.

class: LAW 6512
class title: Intellectual Property Law
description: This is a survey course in intellectual property (IP) law. It covers the what, when, who, how, and why of IP: what kinds of information can be protected, when these rights arise, who owns them, how they are enforced, and why the legal system goes to all this trouble. We will perform comparative anatomy on bodies of law including trade secret, patent, copyright, trademark, false advertising, and rights of publicity, dissecting them to understand them on their own terms and in relationship to each other.

class: LAW 6533
class title: Federal Income Taxation of Low-Income Taxpayers
description: This course covers the present structure of tax law in the United States, including the measurement of taxable income, tax compliance fundamentals, and other related Federal and state tax issues facing low-income taxpayers, with some emphasis on immigrant taxpayers. Participants also discuss various tax research and compliance tools that may be used by practitioners and/or volunteer low-income taxpayer assistance programs. Guest lecturers will focus on specific topics such as the rules surrounding ITIN preparation and other tax issues unique to low-income taxpayers.
outcome: Develop effective communication skills when dealing with low-income taxpayers, including immigrant taxpayers., Attain analytical and functional competency in various areas of Federal and state tax law., Demonstrate working knowledge of ethics and ability to apply to real-world settings., Demonstrate the ability to solve practical tax problems that surround low-income taxpayers., Develop skills to be critical consumers of tax information and research., 

class: LAW 6561
class title: International Human Rights
description: International Human Rights Law and Institutions seeks to promote and secure for the individual protection of an array of agreed rights in his/her national society.  The individual will turn to international law and institutions in order to enhance support for and to vindicate his/her rights under national law. The objective of the course is to introduce the student to the theory, norms, and institutions central to the international human rights legal regime. The course will explore the emergence and the enforcement of international human rights norms, the international machinery for the protection of human rights in the world community including the United Nations Human Rights Committee, the European Court of Human Rights, the African Court of Human Rights, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, and the International Criminal Court. Relevant decisions of these courts and of municipal courts will be studied as well as basic documents.  It will also examine domestic mechanisms for the enforcement of international human rights against foreign violators through for example, the Alien Tort Claims Act and the Torture Victim Protection Act. It will further examine the liability of corporations for human rights violations.

class: LAW 6569
class title: Introduction to Depositions
description: Depositions are a critical component of pretrial discovery. Indeed, many cases are lost, won, or settled because of information gleaned at a deposition. Attorneys also often modify trial strategies because of a witness's performance at a deposition. Because depositions play such an important role in litigation, the majority of junior litigation attorneys can expect to deal with depositions in some manner from the very start of their careers. This introductory course will expose students to several facets of a deposition: preparing for deposition, asking questions at a deposition, defending the witness at a deposition, using documents at a deposition, and reviewing the transcript of a deposition. Students can expect to take and defend mock depositions and to observe and critique their fellow students' deposition skills. The course will culminate in a three-hour deposition in which students will team up to depose and defend two witnesses. Students must set aside one Saturday morning at the end of the semester for this deposition.

class: LAW 6572
class title: Introduction to Transactional Lawyering
description: The conventional law school curriculum implicitly emphasizes appellate litigation, teaching students to read, argue and distinguish cases, and to predict what a judge will do. A transactional practice demands additional skills. A full understanding requires years of experience - not something that can be bottled into a one-credit course. Transactional Lawyering provides students with an initial intro­duc­tion to how a deal is structured and what a deal lawyer does - familiarizing them with some common problems and the tools used to address them. In exploring these problems, the course draws on moral hazard, adverse selection, and other economic theories and applies them to real deal issues.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6131. 

class: LAW 6601
class title: Land Use Law
description: This course will provide a broad introduction to the theory, doctrine, and history of land use regulation. Topics will include the meaning of ownership; theories behind land use controls; the private nuisance action; zoning, including the permissible content of zoning laws, and contract and conditional zoning; vested rights, development agreements, and "ballot box" zoning; and constitutional limitations on government action in land use controls, including takings law, the First Amendment, and due process challenges. We will also consider current hot topics in land use law such as brownfields legislation, natural gas fracking, sprawl, conservation easements, historic preservation laws, endangered species legislation, and global warming litigation. 

class: LAW 6609
class title: Discovery Disputes
description: Document discovery is a critical aspect of pre-trial practice in which litigants must obtain the evidence necessary to transform their allegations into facts to be proven at trial. "Bad" documents uncovered in the course of discovery often make or break a party's claims, defenses, and—in high profile cases—willingness to risk public disclosure of damaging or embarrassing internal emails, chats, and text messages. Parties are therefore incentivized to withhold such communications on the basis of attorney-client or other forms of privilege which, in turn, results in extensive motion practice. Despite the high-stakes nature of this phase of trial, junior attorneys are often primarily responsible for setting the strategy and carrying out the day-to-day tasks involved in obtaining and producing documents necessary to satisfy a litigant's obligations under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. This introductory course will familiarize students with the mechanics of document discovery and resolving the disputes between litigants that frequently arise complex commercial cases. Students will team up to assume the roles of plaintiff's or defendant's counsel to navigate a discovery dispute based on outcome-dispositive facts and communications based on real-world cases. Students will learn to collaboratively strategize and draft requests for production, responses and objections, deficiency correspondence with opposing counsel, and briefing to compel production of improperly withheld documents. Students will also participate in simulated "meet-and-confer" negotiations with opposing counsel, and the course will culminate in oral argument on their motion.

class: LAW 6635
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Advocacy and Policy
description: Unemployment is damaging to individuals, families, and society. Governments around the world have attempted to mitigate these harms, in some countries through generous out-of-work benefits, targeted retraining services for job seekers, and disincentives for employers to lay workers off in the first place. But why is unemployment so persistent in capitalist societies? What does it mean for an individual to be unemployed? What can the US learn from other countries to better combat unemployment and reduce its socially damaging effects? Students will work with community partners to assist the unemployed or conduct policy-relevant research.

class: LAW 6641
class title: Professional Responsibility
description: This course is intended to provide a comprehensive overview of the law governing lawyers in a variety of practice settings, including transactional, counseling, and civil and criminal litigation. The course is not focused merely on the ABA's Model Rules, but draws extensively from judicial decisions in malpractice and disqualification cases, the new Restatement of the Law Governing Lawyers, and other sources of law. A major theme is the relationship between state bar disciplinary rules and the generally applicable law of tort, contracts, agency, procedure, and crimes. Another significant theme is the prevention of attorney discipline and malpractice liability through advance planning.

class: LAW 6645
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Engaged Learning Option
description: In the engaged learning option, you will work with community partners providing legal advice or workforce development services, or gather and analyze research data supervised by Prof. Ian Greer.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: ILRID 6635 or LAW 6635.

class: LAW 6722
class title: Local Government Law
description: This course will explore how local governments (cities, counties, towns, special districts and authorities) operate in practical detail. It will focus on the powers of local government as established by Constitutional, Federal, State and local law. The course will look at issues faced by these governments and explore how they govern in light of legal, practical and political considerations. The course will include: a) a review of the balance of legal powers between Federal, State and local governments; b) The rules by which local governments operate including the forms, structures and financing of local governments, and c) the practical application of the laws to numerous functions of local governments including policing, health, discrimination and the environment.

class: LAW 6730
class title: Multicultural Work Environment I and II
description: The goal of this course is to promote an understanding of the challenges encountered in the work environment as a result of cultural differences. Students are required to complete a ten-page paper by September 15 following their summer internship.

class: LAW 6742
class title: Patent Law
description: This course will focus on U.S. patent law giving comprehensive coverage of doctrinal elements and touching on key policy issues.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: an intellectual property survey course such as LAW 6511.

class: LAW 6745
class title: Doing Business in the Middle East
description: At the outset, the course provides an introduction to the legal system of the MENA countries. In the same context, it introduces Islamic law (Shari'a law), including sources of legislation, MENA countries' reaction towards the Shari'a as a source of law, and the impact of the Shari'a on MENA laws and regulations in general and on the doing business in particular. The course then
samples the specificity of several substantive areas for foreign lawyers in MENA countries, including business associations, contract law, mergers and acquisitions, securities regulations, settlement of disputes, and corporate governance. These areas will be examined to the extent required to enable foreign lawyers to access MENA countries or to support American companies investing in the MENA.

class: LAW 6761
class title: Principles of American Legal Writing
description: This course provides foreign-trained lawyers with an introduction to the American legal system and essential principles of legal writing, analysis and legal research skills in the United States. Students are afforded an opportunity to practice some of the forms of writing common to American legal practice by drafting documents such as memoranda and briefs in the context of representing hypothetical clients. Students are given the opportunity to conference individually with the instructor and to re-write assignments after receiving the instructor's comments.

class: LAW 6764
class title: Practical Lawyering
description: This class focuses on the practical aspects of lawyering, doing so by exploring the lawyer's role in four typical situations: advising clients in connection with (a) the formation and early financing of a business entity; (b) the exercise of boards of directors and management of their fiduciary duty of oversight; (c) the day-to-day operations of a business, including contractual and online relationships with customers and suppliers; and (d) sale or change-of-control transactions. 

class: LAW 6767
class title: Cannabis Law and Policy
description: Adult-use cannabis (also known as recreational marijuana) is now legal in 24 states and the US cannabis industry is expected to reach almost $40 billion in 2024. Yet adult-use cannabis also remains federally illegal. Amid this contradiction, California sits as the largest cannabis market in the world, and New York State (which legalized adult-use cannabis on March 21, 2021) is expected to boom from a $2 million cannabis industry in 2022, to over $7 billion in 2025. This course will explore conundrums for lawyers advising clients in a dramatically expanding industry where - in just two examples of myriad complexities that we will consider - the product currently may not travel across state lines and (until legalized by states) has contributed to disproportionate community effects by the American "war on drugs." Students will write a substantial and research-based paper.

class: LAW 6791
class title: Public International Law
description: An introduction to the legal rules governing the conduct of states vis-à-vis other states, individuals, and international organizations, with reference to major current events and issues. Topics include the nature and sources of international law; the establishment and recognition of states; principles concerning state sovereignty, territory, and jurisdiction; the law of treaties; state responsibility; use of force; the protection of individuals; and relationships between international and national law.

class: LAW 6801
class title: Remedies
description: This course examines the remedial consequences of lawsuits and the remedial choices open to litigants: essential strategic information for students considering a litigation-oriented practice. It covers compensatory remedies, injunctions, and special remedies such as constructive trusts. It also clarifies the meaning of equity and the role of equity in modern American law, as well as the developing law of unjust enrichment. The course focuses on private law (tort, contract, property), but it also includes some coverage of remedies for enforcement of Constitutional rights and public law.

class: LAW 6803
class title: Roman Law
description: This course investigates the rich body of Roman laws on slaves, crime, and women and children. Students will explore the evolution of power over marginalized groups and penalties for crimes at the beginnings of the Western legal system in order to consider ideas of identity, agency, responsibility, and punishment from a cultural and historical perspective. Through an examination of the legal sources (in translation) and the study of the rise and changes of governmental institutions of justice, this course will examine the evolution of jurisprudence: the development of conceptions of power and shifts in the understanding of just punishment. The course is designed as an introduction to these topics suitable for all students.

class: LAW 6821
class title: Securities Regulation
description: This course analyzes key issues under the U.S. federal securities laws, principally the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, with respect to the domestic and international offer and sale of securities. It includes a study of what constitutes a security, the public offering process, mandatory disclosure requirements for public companies, exemptions from registration (including exempt global offerings), and potential liabilities and sanctions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6131.

class: LAW 6822
class title: Social Science and the Law
description: The employment of social science research evidence to support legal claims is dramatically expanding in both civil and criminal domains. Social scientists are called upon to discuss trademark surveys, race and gender discrimination claims in education, employment and housing, damage awards, eyewitness identifications, false confessions, lineups, cultural defenses, and more. Social Science and the Law examines these and other rapidly accelerating uses of social science in litigation. The course also examines controversies over the use of social science in various legal domains.

class: LAW 6861
class title: Supervised Teaching

class: LAW 6862
class title: Supervised Experiential Learning
description: Supervised experiential learning courses allow students to complete a discrete pro bono advocacy project under faculty supervision. The course operates much like a directed reading or supervised writing – students must make arrangements directly with a faculty member. Only full-time, long-term members of the faculty may teach this course. The student's role must involve a substantial lawyering experience that implicates one or more of the Law School's learning outcomes. Work for the course should consist of the types of matters that are currently handled by the clinical program. If a student wishes to seek pro bono hours certification for their work in the course, the student and faculty member should ensure the work satisfies the relevant standard.

class: LAW 6871
class title: Supervised Writing

class: LAW 6881
class title: Supervised Teaching and Supervised Writing - Lawyering Program Honors Fellows
description: Lawyering Program Honors Fellows serve for the full academic year as teaching assistants in the Lawyering course. With training and guidance from the Lawyering faculty, Honors Fellows work on myriad course-related tasks and some program-wide initiatives. In addition to meeting regularly with first-year students and critiquing papers, Honors Fellows may help design course assignments and documents, participate in simulations, and assist the research attorneys with the teaching of legal research. Honors Fellows also teach classes on the Bluebook. Additionally, Honors Fellows serve as educational mentors to first-year students and may participate in workshops on basic law-school skills. 

class: LAW 6883
class title: Corporate Finance Transactions Workshop: Bootcamp
description: This course will cover the day-to-day function of lawyers practicing corporate finance (both in-house and as outside counsel). Topics will include basic corporate finance principles, accounting for lawyers and how to learn and stay on top of current issues and trends, non-GAAP measures, important investor disclosures in both the private and public company context, relations with the CFO, audit committee and board of directors and significant shareholders, capital raising and other transformative transactions and financings, developing high quality compliance and risk management policies and procedures, the impact of significant litigation and government investigations.

class: LAW 6891
class title: Taxation of Corporations and Shareholders
description: This course examines the federal income taxation of corporate transactions, including incorporations, dividends, redemptions, liquidations, and reorganizations.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 6441.

class: LAW 6893
class title: Technology Transactions
description: This course is designed to familiarize students with common issues that arise in, and how they are addressed by attorneys who structure, technology transactions.

class: LAW 6897
class title: The Business of Law Firms in Today's Tech Economy: Operations, People, and Strategies for Success
description: This course helps students understand the structure, operation, key financial metrics, technology and the business and human capital strategies employed to optimize law firm performance. In addition to providing insight regarding decisions impacting business operations andstructure,focus will be placed on how law firms are adapting (or failing to adapt) to changing technology, including how these changes affect the lives and careers of associates and partners.

class: LAW 6898
class title: The Art of Negotiation in Business and Sports
description: In this course, we will be analyzing and incorporating negotiation techniques and strategies, along with problem solving solutions, through in-depth simulations and experiential learning exercises taught by top executives who have successfully negotiated in business and sports. Students will get the opportunity to improve their skills through practical training and guidance from one of the most experienced negotiators in professional sports, Michael Huyghue. This course involves direct supervision of the student's performance; numerous opportunities for performance, feedback, and self-evaluation; and an in-depth classroom instructional component. The classroom component includes negotiation simulations with collaborative problem solving for actual business problems of sports organizations. Lastly, this course implements both formative and summative assessment methods in its curriculum to measure and improve student learning and provide meaningful feedback to students. 
 

class: LAW 6921
class title: Trial Advocacy
description: The course is devoted to the study and weekly performance of the full range of trial techniques. Fundamental skills are taught in the context of challenging procedural and substantive law problems. Each stage of the trial is examined: jury selection, opening statement, direct examination, cross-examination, objections, impeachment, exhibits, expert witnesses, child witnesses, pre-trial, and closing argument. In addition to a lecture and student exercises every week, students will do a full day jury trial exercise at the completion of the course on a weekend at a local court with an actual judge and jury. All weekly performances are digitally recorded and reviewed and then re-reviewed by another faculty member with the student individually. There are occasional written assignments and class attendance is mandatory for all exercises sessions and the first class lecture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: LAW 6401.

class: LAW 6941
class title: Trusts and Estates
description: The course surveys the law of succession to property, including wills and intestate succession, as well as the law of trusts. The course covers the basic aspects of the federal gift and estate taxes, but does not examine them intensively.

class: LAW 6985
class title: Becoming Thriving Lawyers

class: LAW 7001
class title: Anti-Liberalisms
description: Critiques of liberalism have long been foundational to leftist political thought including to "critical theory." However, parallel critiques of "liberal legalism" today are even more central to rightwing and conservative legal and political thought—including the jurisprudence of the Roberts Court. This Seminar examines the nature of anti-liberal sentiment for both left and right over history and into the present. Readings will range across philosophy, popular journalism and commentary, and legal opinions and will investigate the usual targets of anti-liberal critique (whether capitalism, legal positivism, the state, or individualism); alternatives to liberalism (Romanticism, communitarianism, natural law, Catholic and other political theology); and intellectual touchstones (Schmitt, Heidegger, Nietzsche, Kafka) that have connected left and right. Why critique liberalism today? Does such thinking in fact unite both poles of the political spectrum? To what extent can critiques of liberalism be seen to shape legal and political reasoning, including changing constitutional law doctrine?

class: LAW 7034
class title: First Amendment Law Clinic III
description: A continuation of the First Amendment Clinic for advanced students, with emphasis on leadership roles and advanced litigation skills.

class: LAW 7084
class title: Asian Americans and the Law
description: Asian Americans have played a prominent role in America's legal history. Despite their small numbers, Asian Americans have been at the center of many legal controversies -- some historic that involved issues still of relevance today and some contemporary that present challenging and contentious questions. The objective of this course is to examine the legal history of people of Asian descent in the United States. The method of the class is to focus on primary legal sources: the Constitution, statutes, regulations, and judicial decisions, to trace this history and the themes it reveals. The seminar will be divided into four units, each to be covered over approximately three classes. We begin in Unit 1 with "Arrival, Exclusion, and Citizenship" -- the arrival of Asians in America and the first immigration statutes, the exclusion laws, the recent travel ban, and the question of citizenship. In Unit 2, we examine "Historical Discrimination" -- early violence against Asian Americans and efforts by state and local governments to regulate Asians in the United States. In Unit 3, we turn to "Internment and Redress and Reparations" -- the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II and the efforts to obtain redress and reparations. Finally, in Unit 4, we consider "Contemporary Issues" -- profiling and the question of "spies," employment discrimination and the so-called "Bamboo Ceiling," education and the thorny issue of reverse discrimination, the concept of the model minority, and contemporary violence against Asians, including during the pandemic. The last class will be reserved for summation and concluding discussions about the themes of the class.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5021. 

class: LAW 7134
class title: Digital Assets
description: This course will introduce students to the law and policy governing digital assets, particularly crypto assets, a super-set of computer software protocols. The professor will approach the course from his perspective as a full-time business planner and advisor with more than 40 years of experience in major law firms and the SEC. The bankruptcies of FTX and other centralized crypto companies will be explored in this seminar. Crypto assets include cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ether and stablecoins, consumption tokens, non-fungible tokens ("NFTs") and other decentralized finance ("DeFi") assets, often traded on exchanges and sometimes managed by decentralized autonomous organizations ("DAOs"). The applicable law is a combination of securities, commodities, derivatives, banking, money transmission, business organization and other US federal and state laws. Attention also will be given to non-US law in this seminar and to pending US federal legislation. Political economy views and choices, game theory and concerns about regulatory capture, the environment and inclusion of historically underbanked communities also will inform instruction and classroom discussions. Pedagogy of the course will consist of assigned readings (articles, cases, existing and proposed regulations and legislation) underlying seminar discussions. There might be occasional guest speakers from diverse sectors of the digital assets industry and the practicing Bar. Students will be expected to participate via Q&amp;A when guest speakers present. A final paper also will be required.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 6131.

class: LAW 7135
class title: Bioethics and the Law Seminar
description: This course will provide an overview of legal and ethical issues in the provision of health care in the United States. It will provide a foundational understanding of bioethics, which forms the ethical basis for modern health care decision-making, as well as how it interplays with law and medicine. After building an ethical and legal knowledge base, the class will focus on selected bioethics issues and how they arise in patient care. Topics to be discussed will include informed consent, advance directives (health care proxies, living wills, etc.), surrogate decision-making for incapacitated adults and for children, reproductive health care issues, and end-of-life treatment issues, including medical futility. Students will be graded based upon participation and a written paper discussing an ethical and legal issue arising in a health care setting.

class: LAW 7156
class title: Copyright Litigation Lawyering
description: This seminar will allow students to gain the knowledge, expertise and confidence to successfully advocate and resolve copyright disputes. Seminar content will include the elements of direct and secondary liability; demonstrating and defending against claims of substantial similarity; navigating through the ever-evolving defense of fair use; enhancing or minimizing actual and statutory damages; the application of the Copyright Act statute of limitations; and negotiating strategies. Student will sharpen their skills in applying these concepts through in-class presentations in nearly every class, many of which will be videotaped. Students will also prepare a 5-page memo, based on the facts of an actual case, analyzing whether infringing content qualifies for fair use. Towards the end of the semester each student will start a mock litigation based on a hypothetical fact pattern by drafting a complaint and answering a fellow student's complaint. During the final two classes each student will negotiate with a fellow student (one playing the role of plaintiff's counsel and the other defendant's counsel) in an attempt to settle the mock litigation. The negotiation sessions will be videotaped. After each session, fellow students and the professor will provide feedback and guidance. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5081 or LAW 7783. 

class: LAW 7169
class title: Deals Seminar: Real Estate Transactions
description: In this seminar, students will learn to analyze and evaluate customary commercial real estate transaction agreements, such as purchase and sale contracts, management, development and joint venture agreements, space and ground leases, debt financing instruments and commitment letters and term sheets, with particular attention given to the give and take involved in negotiating these documents and their business rationale.

class: LAW 7178
class title: Moral Foundations of Anti-Discrimination
description: What makes discrimination wrongful, when it is? Does its wrongness depend on social context and historical background? Does it depend on harmful consequences? What makes a certain ground of discrimination an improper ground? Is indirect discrimination ("disparate impact") really a form of discrimination or perhaps a mild form of affirmative action? What should be the reach and scope of anti-discrimination law? Should it allow for exemptions on religious or free speech grounds? We will address these and similar questions at a fairly abstract level, trying to understand the philosophical principles that might explain the various aspects of anti-discrimination law. Most of the legal examples will be focused on discrimination cases in the context of employment and service provision (Title VII),  but we will also consider racial profiling, disability cases, and some others. 

class: LAW 7179
class title: Digital Life Research Seminar
description: This seminar focuses on the societal perspectives on digital technology. Speakers will come from a range of disciplines including computer science, data science, engineering, OR, humanities, social sciences, law, and policy and will present work in progress that considers ethical and political questions related to the design, development, and deployment of digital, computational, and information systems and devices. Topics include accountable algorithms, bias in machine learning, AI and the workplace, privacy, and cybersecurity.

class: LAW 7230
class title: Faculty at Home Seminar

class: LAW 7259
class title: Faculty At Home Seminar: Constitutional Law in the News
description: This course will explore constitutional issues in the news within the six months preceding the fall semester, and that arise during the semester. Most of the issues will be constitutional rights issues, but some structural issues may also be addressed. The class will meet for six sessions. Each student will be responsible for selecting one topic of discussion, and for, after consultation with the professor selecting readings appropriate for the topic. Each student will have partial responsibility for the discussion of his or her own topic, and also partial responsibility for the discussion of one topic chosen by another student.

class: LAW 7267
class title: Comparative Contract Law
description: The main focus of the course is to analyze some key institutions of contract law from a comparative perspective. The course will start with the illustration and the discussion of some general principles of contracts (civil law tradition v. common law tradition), such for instance formation and termination of contract. After a general introduction, the focus will be on a specific issue: illegality in contract law. Illegality is a fundamental problem that must be handled with attention. It covers different cases and obliges jurists to answer to difficult questions, such as if it is right that a party to a contract tainted by illegality not be able to recover from the other party the money initially paid under the contract or to what extent illegal conduct may deprive a claimant of its rights. The topic assumes primary importance because from the twentieth century onwards the statutes that include prohibitions have been multiplied, for instance to protect collective values, the environment, health, and so on. Faced with the flourishing of this kind of legislation, appropriate remedies must be applied. This issue will be analyzed in detail to make students aware of the fundamental similarities and differences between the contract laws in different legal systems. 

class: LAW 7299
class title: Constitutionalism from the Global South: Theory, Practice, Critique
description: The political project of Constitutionalism claims universal validity. However, Constitutionalism is differently understood, justified, and implemented in different parts of the world. This class will explore the constitutionalism of the global south. We will start by attempting to draw analytical distinctions between the general project of constitutionalism and its justifications and theoretic underpinnings in the global south. Then, we will focus on the major trends in global south constitutional practice: (i) widespread access to the constitutional jurisdiction; (ii) judicial enforcement of socio-economic rights; (iii) the doctrine of unconstitutional constitutional amendments; (iv) projects of peacemaking through transitional justice, and (v) the 'constitutionalization' of private law. Finally, the course will assess various global south critiques of constitutionalism, and evaluate whether it offers a plausible alternative to the current model of American constitutionalism.

class: LAW 7311
class title: Immigration and Refugee Law
description: This course explores the evolving relationship between U.S. immigration policy and our national purposes. Immigration plays a central role in contemporary American life, significantly affecting our foreign relations, human rights posture, ethnic group relations, labor market conditions, welfare programs, public services, and domestic politics. It also raises in acute form some of the most basic problems that our legal system must address, including the rights of insular minorities, the concepts of nationhood and sovereignty, fair treatment of competing claimants for scarce resources, the imperatives of mass administrative justice, and pervasive discrimination. In approaching these questions, the course draws on diverse historical, judicial, administrative, and policy materials.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 5021.

class: LAW 7315
class title: International Law and the Use of Force
description: This course addresses contemporary challenges to the international law relating to the use of force and is designed to introduce students to both jus ad bellum (the recourse to force) and jus in bello (conduct in war). We will explore both the circumstances that legally justify the use of force, including a discussion of self defense, humanitarian intervention, counter-piracy, and counter-terrorism, including drone strikes. We then investigate international humanitarian law, the set of principles that seek, for humanitarian reasons, to limit the effects of armed conflict. Here we will include a discussion of the implications of nuclear weapons and autonomous weapons. The course will rely on legal analysis of questions relating to the use of force, while also covering case studies and current news events.

class: LAW 7373
class title: Judicial Decision Making
description: Judges play a central role in the justice system. Despite their importance, judicial decision making remains poorly understood. How do judges make decisions? What influences their rulings? Obviously, the relevant law and the facts of cases matter, but whatother internal or external factors shape their judgments? Drawing on the work of judges, legal scholars, and social scientists, this seminar explores those questions. Among other things, the potential impact of political ideology, religion, race, gender, life experience, cognitive limitations, professional norms, workload, selection and retention, specialization, collegiality, hierarchy, litigant characteristics, and public opinion will be examined. The implications for effective advocacy, court reform, and the achievement of social justice will be addressed.

class: LAW 7399
class title: Land Use and Administrative Law in New York City

class: LAW 7405
class title: Law and Ethics of Armed Conflict
description: We will explore legal and policy frameworks involving armed conflict. A descriptive approach is utilized to examine what the law is, while a normative approach is embraced to inquire whether the law is what it should be. Beginning with the law related to utilizing armed force, we will assess paradigms such as traditional just war theory and the emerging "revisionist" perspective, the present United Nations construct, and other related models. Law and policy involving the conduct of hostilities and enforcement of that law are examined from an international, domestic, and comparative perspective. Practical application of law and policy is emphasized by engaging in a thorough case study of an actual incident involving the use of armed force and by exploring the effect of emerging technologies, such as cyber, artificial intelligence, and space capabilities, on the law.

class: LAW 7406
class title: Law and Economics Colloquium
description: This Colloquium will feature a series of presentations by leading scholars from around the country who are engaged in research at the intersection of law and economics. Typically, we will spend two weeks on each paper. In the first session, we will discuss the paper and situate it in the relevant literature. In the second week, the author visits our class to present and respond to questions about the paper, and we are joined by other law faculty and members of the Cornell community. Students are expected to participate in these discussions and write multiple response papers during the term, which review and critique the working papers. Final grades are based on students' response papers, presentations, and in-class participation. There are no formal prerequisites. Although a background in economics and/or statistics may be helpful, it is not expected, and students who are curious and prepared to work through the ideas in the papers are strongly encouraged to enroll.

class: LAW 7440
class title: Law and Social Change: Comparative Law in Africa
description: This seminar is designed for students interested in a comparative study of law in Africa. The seminar will include an introduction to multiple African legal systems, as well as African customary law, constitutional law, labor law, property law and family law. The seminar will examine the current law in the context of changes that have taken place in African society from colonization through the present day. Students will read cases and statutes from multiple African countries. Students will be encouraged to choose an area of law to conduct a comparative analysis in the required final paper. The seminar creates opportunities for multicultural experiences through immersion in South Africa's society and culture during a three-week winter trip to Johannesburg, South Africa, where students will receive instruction at the University of Johannesburg. (Travel assistance will be available based on demonstrated need. Please contact, Program Manager, IAD at 190 Uris Hall for more information.) The main objective of this aspect of the program is to enhance and reinforce academic learning by providing students the opportunity to actively engage with individuals and organizations directly involved in the administration of law in Africa in a variety of concentrations. The seminar will examine problems of law and how they have been addressed in Africa with particular attention to the interaction of the common law, African customary law, and other imported systems of law. Legal interaction between Africa and Europe, which began before colonial rule, intensified during the colonial period and has continued after independence. During the Colonial period, the Common Law and Civil law were imported into Africa and operated alongside customary law. The result is that pluralism of law is a common feature of legal systems in nearly all African states. The conflicts between the imported laws and customary law have generated considerable interest in reform and the integration of laws in various African countries as well as creating an opportunity to look to other legal system for alternative approaches.

class: LAW 7450
class title: Topics in Presidential Power
description: The course will address the history of presidential power and its constitutional and political implications. From the "Age of Reason" in 1787 to the present, the authority and power of the President of the United States has been the subject of intense scrutiny. The course will examine the executive branch relative to the enumerated and implied powers of that branch as shaped by war and conflict, presidential initiatives, congressional action, and judicial action. This will include the historical and recent presidential claims of inherent and prerogative power and the Constitutional endangerment associated with those claims.

class: LAW 7572
class title: Litigation Drafting
description: This course focuses on drafting documents typically encountered during the pretrial phase of civil litigation. As drafters, lawyers must think strategically about, and understand the conventions unique to, each document. Students will have repeated opportunities to develop essential drafting and professional skills through a combination of in-class exercises and take-home writing assignments related to pleadings, motions, discovery requests, affidavits, demand letters, and settlement agreements.

class: LAW 7598
class title: Negotiation and Facilitation Seminar
description: Introduces students to the theory and practice of Negotiation and Facilitation in both legal and non-legal contexts. Theories of negotiation, conflict style, adversarial negotiation, and problem-solving negotiation will be covered, with an emphasis on developing necessary skills for use in meetings, with people in conflict, and with groups problem-solving together. Readings and lectures will provide students with a framework for analyzing negotiations as well as tools and concepts useful in negotiating more effectively, while practical exercises will highlight the challenges of this important but often-neglected lawyering skill. Simulations, exercises, readings and discussions will be used for this seminar. Participants will practice negotiation and will learn some of the challenges of this important, but often neglected, lawyering skill.

class: LAW 7621
class title: Issues in Poverty Law
description: In this seminar we will examine some of the ways in which the legal system (the law, courts, lawyers, and litigation) responds to some of the most severe problems of poverty.  The concept of "judicial review" will be critical to our efforts, i.e. what role can and should the courts, our third branch of government, play in shaping social policy. We will also pay special attention to how courts and public bodies make decisions -- what factors get special consideration from decision makers.   The assigned readings will serve as the basis of class discussions.  Topics will include education, homelessness, public assistance, race and criminal justice, substance abuse, housing, and other areas of relevance.

class: LAW 7655
class title: Property Theory and Practice
description: This seminar focuses on lease law in the 50 states. I am an Associate Reporter of the ongoing Restatement of the Law Fourth, Property. As I am working on restating the lease law in the 50 states (along with Tom Merrill at Columbia and Henry Smith at Harvard) and consider the policy direction when the state laws are split, this seminar enables students to get involve in the "restating" process. Each week, the discussion centers around a number of closely related issues. Moreover, I have collected information on lease law for more than 100 countries in the world. The instructor thus will also compare the lease law provisions in the US with these countries. A reasonable amount of reading (mostly Restatement drafts) will be assigned.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: 1L Property.

class: LAW 7698
class title: Comparative Private Law
description: Although the seminar is called Comparative "Private" Law and indeed we will discuss fundamental issues in property, contract, torts, trust, and civil procedure in detail, the methodology explored in this seminar is useful for comparative public law, and in fact, any legal studies. The legal methods covered in the seminar may differ from a more conventional comparative law course in two ways: Wesley Hohfeld's analytical jurisprudence and social science approaches. It has been more than 100 years since Hohfeld advanced his powerful insights: all legal relations can be reduced to one of the four "jural correlatives." The Hohfeldian method is useful in guiding jurists through the maze of comparative law. Using the Hohfeldian method, comparative lawyers may uncover unnoticed similarities or identify critical differences across legal systems. Believe me: the Hohfeldian method will help you win a case or two in your legal career by enabling you to see through the conceptual confusion made by your opponent or made in the key legal documents. In addition, this seminar will explore how economic theories and statistical methods (including artificial intelligent algorithms) change the way jurists use foreign materials. Positive social science methods provide a new normative foundation for comparative law exercises: for domestic lawmakers and courts, how foreign laws have worked provides a valuable real-world examination of whether a certain legal rule would produce normatively desirable outcomes.

class: LAW 7737
class title: Social Entrepreneurship
description: This class will allow students to begin the process of creating an advocacy project around a special population or novel approach of their own choosing.  Students will spend the semester developing their projects.  The class is designed to support students in working in areas not addressed (or under-addressed) by existing clinical or legal service programs.  Students may work alone or with one or more partners.   
Students must be comfortable in a less structured, more entrepreneurial environment, and be highly motivated by their chosen topic.  They should have a project idea ready for the first class.  Students should feel free to contact Doug Lasdon with questions about the class.  They can email Doug at   dlasdon@urbanjustice.org.  
 

class: LAW 7740
class title: Law and Economics: A Game-Theoretic Approach
description: This course introduces graduate students to the main concepts and ideas of law and economics, founded on elementary game theory. These ideas are then applied to contemporary policy concerns, from promoting economic development and designing welfare interventions in developing countries, to controlling corruption and financial fraud. The defining feature of the course is the structuring of these topics within a common conceptual framework, and training students to develop these ideas further and apply them to new research questions.

class: LAW 7745
class title: Seminar on Mergers and Acquisitions
description: The focus of this course is developing the lawyering skills required by an attorney advising a client who is selling or acquiring a business. Individual drafting exercises, as well as strategy discussions and negotiations by student teams acting as counsel to the buyer or seller, will be interspersed with lectures on the business acquisition process and analysis of selected publicly available documentation of actual acquisition transactions. The typical chronology of an acquisition: negotiation by the buyer and the seller of the basic terms of the deal including selection of structure (sale of stock or assets; merger); drafting and negotiation of a term sheet or letter of intent; due diligence investigation; drafting and negotiation of the definitive acquisition agreement; handling of problems encountered between the execution of the agreement and the closing of the acquisition; and the closing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Contracts and Corporations; Prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6131.

class: LAW 7760
class title: Movement Lawyering Clinic I
description: This course gives students the opportunity to engage in the movement lawyering. The course hasboth a classroom component and a community component. This course gives students the opportunity to engage in the movement lawyering. The course has both a classroom component and a community component.

class: LAW 7762
class title: Movement Lawyering Clinic II
description: This course gives students the opportunity to engage in the movement lawyering. The course has both a classroom component and a community component. Clinic participants will gain first hand experience, knowledge, and skills in how to work with organizers to use the law to support and defend justice movements. Students will work with lawyers, community organizations, and activists to understand strategies and tactics of movement legal work. They will follow the lead of movement participants and community members to build power and assist in creating lasting change.

class: LAW 7763
class title: Movement Lawyering Clinic III
description: This course gives students the opportunity to engage in the movement lawyering. The course has both a classroom component and a community component. Clinic participants will gain first hand experience, knowledge, and skills in how to work with organizers to use the law to support and defend justice movements. Students will work with lawyers, community organizations, and activists to understand strategies and tactics of movement legal work. They will follow the lead of movement participants and community members to build power and assist in creating lasting change.

class: LAW 7780
class title: The Woke Constitution
description: In recent years, pundits and government officials mostly but not exclusively on the political right have decried wokeness—a somewhat catchall phrase apparently meant to convey a judgmental attitude on the part of progressives. Insofar as the wokeness label connotes censoriousness, it implicates questions of constitutional free speech. More generally, many of the culture-war battles over what Elon Musk has called a civilization-threatening "woke mind virus" raise important legal questions. This seminar will examine various such questions, chiefly through discussion of assigned readings selected by the instructors but also in four or five sessions in which outside scholars with a variety of perspectives will present works in progress. Topics will include: the legal status and scope of academic freedom; restrictions on critical race theory and DEI; state laws banning gender-affirming care for transgender youth; regulation of social media platforms; laws restricting corporate ESG programs; the reorientation of some conservative and liberal views about campus free speech in the wake of the war between Israel and Hamas; and more. Students will produce short reflection papers and a final paper that satisfies the writing requirement.

class: LAW 7782
class title: Topics in Social and Political Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of a topic in social and political philosophy.

class: LAW 7785
class title: Law of Genocide and War Crimes Trials
description: Beginning in November 1945, in an unprecedented attempt to bring war criminals to justice, more than 20 senior government officials and military leaders of Hitlerʼs Third Reich were indicted and tried, in what has become known as the Nuremberg Trial, for crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. Earlier that fall, the SS commandants, officers and guards who had been arrested by the British upon the liberation of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, had been tried before a British military tribunal. These were the first of numerous trials of Nazi war criminals and related criminal and civil proceedings arising out of the Holocaust. This seminar will examine legal and ethical issues raised in these and other trials of Nazi war criminals and individuals accused of collaborating with the Nazis in perpetrating crimes against humanity, including the 1947 "Justice Trial" of Nazi judges and senior officials of the Third Reich Ministry of Justice, the Eichmann Trial in Jerusalem and the 1963-64 Tel Aviv trial of Hersz Barenblat, the head of the Jewish police in the ghetto of Bedzin, Poland. The course will also examine the history of the Genocide Convention, and the developing law of genocide and crimes against humanity with respect to atrocities in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Darfur, including the evolving law on rape and sexual violence as a weapon of war.

class: LAW 7789
class title: Women in Business Law and International Trade
description: Business laws can have substantial positive and negative implications for gender equality. Discriminatory laws or the absence of legislation could threaten women's economic security or create a business environment that does not adequately support working women. On the contrary, supportive laws could promote women's career growth, ability to run businesses, and equal employment opportunities, bringing economic advantages to women and society. In addition, trade liberalization policies as a primary source of economic development can affect gender equality. This explains why gender equality lies at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which asserts gender equality as a fundamental human right and a necessary foundation for a sustainable world. This course examines women's rights in business and trade law as a gateway toward economic growth and development. The course introduces the basics of gender and the law. It, also, looks into the relationship between gender equality and business law, including the various legal aspects of governance and board diversity, women and ownership, gender equality and alternative dispute resolution, and the challenges and advantages facing women in business law. An examination of the relevance of integrating gender issues in trade policies and a discussion of the implications of women's economic empowerment on trade follows. Economic empowerment of women is also highlighted, including promoting women in entrepreneurship, monitoring women into management roles, and empowering women in the workplace. Also, a course on women in business and trade law cannot be completed without elaborating on the role of gender equality in promoting the SDGs. The course concludes with a timely overview of how technology could be used to promote gender equality in general and women's rights in business and trade law in particular.

class: LAW 7805
class title: Advanced Labor Law Clinic
description: The Advanced Labor Law Clinic provides students another opportunity to deepen their understanding of traditional labor and employment law by representing the interests of workers with typical workplace issues. There is no classroom component to this course. Students will dedicate their time to addressing client inquiries related to organizing, collective bargaining, unfair labor practice charges, the Family Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act or other workplace issues. Students may also have the opportunity to represent their clients in a case before the National Labor Relations Board, in mediation or arbitration pursuant to the dispute resolution mechanism in the collective bargaining agreement. In addition to the domestic labor law inquiries, interested students may have the opportunity to address international labor law topics as well. The international labor law work typically occurs in Latin America. During the semester, there will likely be two guest speakers and two panel discussions on timely labor law topics, which students will be required to attend, along with weekly meetings to discuss case preparation and advancement. In this course students will advance the following skills: interviewing, counseling, factual investigation, legal research and writing, problem-solving and depending on the assignment, trial preparation skills (direct and cross-examinations, opening statement and evidentiary arguments).

class: LAW 7811
class title: Capital Punishment Clinic I
description: Death penalty litigation: investigation and the preparation of petitions and briefs. Case selection and student assignments depend on both pedagogical factors and litigation needs of clinic clients. Students read the trial and lower court record and research legal issues. Some students are involved in investigation, while others primarily assist in the preparation of briefs, petitions and other case documents. No student will be required to participate in investigation. All students are included in discussions regarding the necessary investigation, research, and strategy for the cases. 

class: LAW 7814
class title: Advanced Transnational Disputes Clinic
description: In this course, students learn to use strategic litigation to influence the progressive development of the law. Clinic clients and partners include those appearing before international investor-state arbitral tribunals, national courts,such as U.S. federal courts, and other fora. Students learn key skills through acting as counsel for parties as well as for amici curiae in disputes that implicate the protection of fundamental rights. The course includes a seminar component as well as extensive, supervised work as part of a case team.

class: LAW 7815
class title: Capital Punishment Clinic II
description: Death penalty litigation: investigation and the preparation of petitions, memoranda, and briefs. This course is taught as a clinic. Two or possibly three capital cases are worked on by students. Case selection depends on both pedagogical factors and litigation needs of the inmates. Students read the record and research legal issues. Some students are involved in investigation, while others assist in the preparation of papers. All students are included in discussions regarding the necessary investigation, research, and strategy for the cases.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7811.

class: LAW 7833
class title: Criminal Defense Trial Practicum: Local Court
description: Students in this course represent defendants in non-felony criminal cases. The course has  classroom, courtroom and client representation components. The classroom component focuses on all aspects of the handling of a criminal case, including criminal law and procedure, ethics, trial strategy, plea bargaining and trials. The courtroom component involves attendance at court proceedings, including pre-trial conferences. Students will also interview clients and witnesses, and prepare clients and witnesses for trial. All students will conduct negotiations with the District Attorney's Office, do legal research, conduct fact investigation, prepare discovery demands and engage in motion practice.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: LAW 6401.

class: LAW 7839
class title: Entrepreneurship Clinic I
description: The Entrepreneurship Clinic provides students who are interested in transactional work with an opportunity to learn about the legal issues specific to starting and running a business venture. Weekly classes, which may include guest speakers, will introduce students to the common legal questions that entrepreneurs face, including how to choose and form a business entity, structure the ownership of the business, contract with employees and independent contractors, protect intellectual property, and set up the venture for successful financing. Building on the concepts learned in class, student teams will represent local entrepreneurs and start-up businesses on a variety of transactional matters. The client work will introduce students to fundamental transactional skills, ranging from legal research to drafting term sheets and contracts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 6131.

class: LAW 7842
class title: Immigration Law and Advocacy Clinic II
description: In this advanced course, students will continue work on immigration matters including asylum cases, representation for detained and/or undocumented communities, and other projects involving litigation and/or community outreach. Students will take ownership of their cases and projects, working independently or in teams to advance their clients' goals under the instructor's supervision. Prior casework and projects for advanced clinic students have included participation in trial-level immigration litigation; research and writing on issues for undocumented students; time-sensitive case work for detained clients; and filing various immigration petitions with USCIS. Advanced students may also mentor students new to clinic.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one of the following courses: LAW 7841, LAW 7837, LAW 7801 or LAW 7857. 

class: LAW 7843
class title: Immigration Law and Advocacy Clinic III
description: In this advanced course, students will continue work on immigration matters including asylum cases, representation for detained and/or undocumented communities, and other projects involving litigation and/or community outreach. Students will take ownership of their cases and projects, working independently or in teams to advance their clients' goals under the instructor's supervision. Prior casework and projects for advanced clinic students have included participation in trial-level immigration litigation; research and writing on issues for undocumented students; time-sensitive case work for detained clients; and filing various immigration petitions with USCIS. Advanced students may also mentor students new to clinic
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequistite: LAW 7842.

class: LAW 7851
class title: Externship
description: This course allows students, as externs to work full time at approved placement sites (most sites are non-profit organizations or governmental agencies) during the fall or spring semester of their third year or the spring semester of their second year.  The course purpose is to provide a bridge between the study of law and its practice. The student must be supervised/mentored by an attorney and engage in meaningful and "attorney-like" work at the placement which furthers the student's education and career goals. In addition to work responsibilities for the placement, the extern will create a Learning Agenda, prepare weekly Journal entries, engage in a regular electronic Discussion Board with other externs and the instructor, possibly host the faculty director for a site visit, and do a written Description of Placement.  

class: LAW 7854
class title: Tenants Advocacy Practicum I
description: In this course, students will provide information, legal advice, and representation to tenants. The student work in this practicum will directly address the needs of local residents financially impacted by the current pandemic. Students will work on cases for tenants facing a wide variety of housing issues (including but not limited to habitability issues, payment disputes, lease violations, unlawful lockouts, and small claims actions) or seeking eviction defense and homelessness prevention.

class: LAW 7855
class title: International Human Rights: Litigation and Advocacy Clinic I
description: In this clinical course, students will work on projects that will expose them to diverse forms of human rights advocacy. The clinic is litigation-oriented, although clinic students may also be exposed to legislative advocacy and may have the opportunity to engage in fact-finding and research regarding human rights violations abroad. A current sampling of projects includes: (1) appellate advocacy on behalf of prisoners in Malawi who have been denied the right to counsel, and collaboration with lawyers in Malawi to reduce prison overcrowding and protect the rights of pre-trial detainees (in the past, a number of clinic students have traveled to Malawi to work directly with prisoners there); (2) representation of a prisoner at Guantanamo who was tortured by U.S. interrogators; and (3) working with lawyers around the world to promote the implementation of international norms regarding the application of the death penalty.

class: LAW 7857
class title: Farmworker Legal Assistance Clinic I
description: Permission of instructor required. Students who wish to apply to the clinic should submit a resume, transcript, and short statement of interest (no more than two pages) to Prof. Lyon. For more information about the clinic, email Prof. Lyon (beth.lyon@cornell.edu) and schedule a meeting. This course requires off premises travel to meet with clients and participate in hearings. Employment on a farm is one of the worlds' most difficult and dangerous occupations. Farmworkers experience geographic, linguistic, and cultural isolation, separation from family, immigration insecurity reinforced by policing practices, workplace sexual violence, and exclusion from protective employment laws. Working with the new clinic's community partners, Farmworker Legal Assistance Clinic I student attorneys will handle immigration and employment matters on behalf of farmworkers in the region, work that will typically involve negotiation and often require litigation. Students will also work in brief advice and referral outreach sessions in farmworker communities. Clinic participants may also have the opportunity to work on research and writing projects with civil rights, environmental protection, and farmworker rights organizations. Farmworker Clinic students will participate in a lawyering seminar and work with a clinic partner on their assigned cases. The lawyering seminar will focus on skills students need for effective client representation. Students will develop key lawyering skills, including interviewing, counseling, fact investigation, drafting, negotiation, language accessible practice, and, in some cases, trial advocacy.

class: LAW 7858
class title: Farmworker Legal Assistance Clinic II
description: Students collaborate with farmworkers, farmworker families, and partner organizations to use the law in service of their clients' goals. Students who have completed the first semester of any clinical course can seek the instructors' permission to enroll in Farmworker Clinic II, for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 credits, depending on the number of projects undertaken. Students in Farmworker Clinic II work on individual cases for clients and/or non-litigation advocacy projects. They attend roughly four one-hour seminar class "case rounds" meetings during the semester, usually at the same time that Farmworker Clinic I meets. Other multi-clinic classes and trainings will be made available as well.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7857.

class: LAW 7859
class title: Farmworker Legal Assistance Clinic III
description: Students collaborate with farmworkers, farmworker families, and partner organizations to use the law in service of their clients' goals. Students who have completed the first semester of any clinical course can seek the instructors' permission to enroll in Farmworker Clinic III, for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 credits, depending on the number of projects undertaken. Students in Farmworker Clinic II work on individual cases for clients and/or non-litigation advocacy projects. They attend roughly four one-hour seminar class "case rounds" meetings during the semester, usually at the same time that Farmworker Clinic I meets. Other multi-clinic classes and trainings will be made available as well.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7858.

class: LAW 7867
class title: First Amendment Law Clinic
description: This will be the first semester of the newly-created First Amendment Clinic. Students will engage in litigation and policy analysis supporting the interests of news outlets, journalists, researchers, and other newsgatherers in aid of their critical function of reporting and communicating important news and information, as well as human rights advocates, political activists, and other individuals targeted based on their expression. The Clinic's cases involve the intersection of Freedom of Information laws or the First Amendment with several substantive areas of law related to the promotion of social justice: immigration, criminal justice, scientific integrity, democratic institutions and norms, human rights, journalism, and internet speech. Students will have the opportunity to vet potential cases, conduct offensive and defensive legal research, write party and amicus briefs, and, if they continue in the clinic next year, may have the possibility of conducting oral argument. The First Amendment Clinic is committed to teamwork and developing student's collaborative skills, and students will have the opportunity to work on these skills in tandem with members of other clinics with which we are co-counseling. In addition, in the clinic seminar, practitioners in the field will speak to the class to provide additional practical insight to students. Finally, students will have the option to visit a newsroom as part of the clinic's "field trip" toward the end of the semester. Students who sign up for the clinic will be required to participate in a "bootcamp" to take place the weekend after the first week of classes. To apply, please submit a resume, statement of interest, short writing sample, and a transcript.

class: LAW 7868
class title: First Amendment Law Clinic II
description: A continuation of the First Amendment Clinic for advanced students, with emphasis on leadership roles and advanced litigation skills.

class: LAW 7871
class title: Labor Law Clinic
description: The Labor Law Clinic will provide students a practical opportunity to learn labor law, while making meaningful contributions to the labor movement and working people. This clinic will combine a substantive classroom component with practical experience. Students will advise labor unions and workers on a variety of legal issues that surface during the semester and may have the opportunity to represent unions in different forums. Students will communicate directly with union representatives and will be required to sort through the facts, research the issues, and provide information and advice. Students will routinely draft legal memoranda, prepare and file pleadings and briefs as required. Students may have the opportunity to represent unions at hearings, mediation or arbitration. Students may also be required to observe a hearing before the National Labor Relations Board, Public Employment Relations Board or an arbitration. Students have also been invited to observe the collective bargaining process.
A small number of students will have the opportunity to dedicate their clinical time to international labor law. Interested students can support the work of nonprofit organizations or global union federations with ongoing cases or projects. These projects occasionally involve a short period of field work outside of the country, typically in Latin America.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: LAW 6011 or LAW 6331.

class: LAW 7878
class title: International Human Rights Clinic: Litigation and Advocacy III
description: In this clinical course, students will work on projects that will expose them to diverse forms of human rights advocacy. The clinic is litigation-oriented, although clinic students may have the opportunity to engage in fact-finding and research regarding human rights violations abroad.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7855. 

class: LAW 7891
class title: Tenants Advocacy Practicum II
description: In this course, students will continue to provide information, legal advice, and representation to tenants. Students will work on cases for tenants facing a wide variety of housing issues (including but not limited to habitability issues, payment disputes, lease violations, unlawful lockouts, and small claims actions) or seeking eviction defense and homelessness prevention.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7854.

class: LAW 7892
class title: Tenants Advocacy Practicum III
description: In this course, students will continue to provide information, legal advice, and representation to tenants. Students will work on cases for tenants facing a wide variety of housing issues (including but not limited to habitability issues, payment disputes, lease violations, unlawful lockouts, and small claims actions) or seeking eviction defense and homelessness prevention. Students will draft legal memoranda and may prepare pleadings for town, village, and city court cases. Students may have the opportunity to appear (likely virtually) in court. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7854 and LAW 7891.

class: LAW 7905
class title: Advocacy for LGBT Communities Practicum
description: Prerequisite: completion of 2 full semesters of law study at a U.S. law school. Permission of the instructor.  Limited enrollment.  12 to 16 hours of work per week. This course has two components. First, a weekly seminar that covers a survey of different legal topics affecting lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) individuals and communities. Topics include relationship recognition, parentage, custody, asylum, employment discrimination, and more. This seminar generally takes place at Cornell Law School. Second, students will spend, on average, 8 hours per week doing client work and case rounds in Syracuse at the offices of the Volunteer Lawyers Project of Onondaga County. Students will work on a variety of legal cases and advocacy projects that advance or defend the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) individuals and communities.  Students will work on developing fundamental lawyering skills such as interviewing, client counseling, and drafting of court forms.  Students will also have the opportunity to engage in public education, legal research and other advocacy.  Students must be able to arrange for their own travel to and from Syracuse on a weekly basis. Students are requested to submit a resume, transcript and letter of interest when applying.

class: LAW 7906
class title: Advocacy for LGBT Communities Practicum II
description: Prerequisite: Completion of LGBT Practicum I. Completion of 2 full semesters of law study at a U.S. law school. Permission of the instructor.  Limited enrollment.  Class may be taken for 2 or 3 credits; 6 to 10 hours of work per week. Students will continue the client work portion of the Practicum I.  Students will work with instructor to identify number of hours worked in Syracuse versus remotely. Students will attend on average 1 hour of class per week for case rounds and for new subject material not covered during their time in Practicum I.

class: LAW 7914
class title: Gender Justice Clinic
description: Students in the Gender Justice Clinic examine and engage in local, national, and global efforts to combat gender-based violence and discrimination. Students work in teams under faculty supervision on cases and projects that address a variety of issues relating to gender justice, including domestic violence, sexual assault, obstetric violence, gender-based discrimination at work, child and forced marriage, and violence and discrimination against people who are transgender and incarcerated, work in the sex industry, or are trafficking survivors. Clinic members provide legal advice and representation to individuals, engage with regional and international human rights bodies, draft or analyze proposed legislation or policy documents, conduct fact-finding and reporting, or contribute to legal trainings and community education initiatives. 

class: LAW 7916
class title: Gender Justice Clinic III
description: Students who have completed the Gender Justice Clinic II may seek the instructors' permission to enroll in the Gender Justice Clinic III for 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 credits, with credits reflecting the workload taken on. Clinic students contribute to efforts to address gender-based violence and discrimination by representing people in a variety of legal matters and undertaking advocacy projects in collaboration with community partners. Students will gain experience in legal advocacy on gender justice issues and develop lawyering and leadership skills. Students will participate in regular weekly team meetings and attend some of the seminars of the full Gender Justice Clinic. Students who wish to enroll in the Clinic should pre-register and contact Prof. Brundige to discuss their participation by the end of the pre-registration period. Supplementary application materials are not required. Please also contact Prof. Brundige if you have any questions about the course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7914 and LAW 7915. 

class: LAW 7925
class title: New York Attorney General Practicum I
description: The New York State Attorney General offers a clinic in which law students work 12-15 hours per week in the Attorney General's Syracuse Regional Office and attend a weekly class at Cornell. Under the supervision of an Assistant Attorney General, students perform legal research, writing, analysis, draft original legal documents and provide trial support. Students will have an opportunity to attend hearings, trials, court arguments, and pre-trial proceedings. Students will acquire litigation skills as well as specialized knowledge of public advocacy litigation. The class will focus on legal and ethical issues seen in litigation and review student experiences working in the Attorney General's office. Each week there will be a different subject area of Attorney General practice discussed or there will be a guest speaker. Topics include medical malpractice, defective highway design, 1983 civil rights actions in Federal Court, petitions in State Court seeking to overturn state actions, prisoner claims public advocacy litigation. Guest speakers will be attorneys serving in various capacities in State or Federal government and often include a judge or court attorney. There will also be a pro bono opportunity to accompany an attorney to a volunteer legal services clinics operated by the Onondaga County Bar Association.

class: LAW 7935
class title: Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Clinic
description: The Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Clinic allows to students to work on matters involving individual and organizational rights, with a focus on First Amendment topics. Students will engage in litigation, policy, and advocacy projects to affirm their clients' legal interests in courts, legislatures, and in society under the supervision of the instructor. Clients may include individuals, organizations, and groups seeking to promote and protect civil rights and civil liberties, including journalists, activists, non-profit organizations, and citizens committed to social justice. Projects will explore specific areas of First Amendment law and how they intersect with other areas (e.g. racial justice, criminal law, immigration, reproductive rights, administrative law, and intellectual property). Students work collaboratively and with primary responsibility for the client relationship, developing core lawyering skills (e.g. interviewing, counseling, legal research and writing, strategic planning, and cross-cultural lawyering). Students will also learn selected areas of First Amendment law, constitutional litigation, and remedies, though no formal experience in those areas is required. Through interaction with the clients and the communities in which they live and operate, students will gain exposure to the role of public interest lawyers in a larger social and political system, and how litigation and advocacy can help facilitate strategic goals.

class: LAW 7938
class title: Advanced Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Clinic
description: For students interested in returning to the Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Clinic (or students who have enrolled in another public law-oriented clinic), an opportunity to develop advanced litigation and policy advocacy skills on topics relating to First Amendment law and its intersections with other doctrinal areas.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7935.

class: LAW 7945
class title: Federal Indian Law Practicum I
description: This ongoing practicum course represents tribes and tribal members in matters involving federal Indian law, large or small, and regardless of forum or the location of the tribe. One current case involves pursuing a claim against the Department of the Interior under The Judgment Funds Act on behalf of disenrolled members of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan. Student work on that matter includes research and document preparation related to filing an appeal of a decision of the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs in federal court, while concurrently developing a broad-based knowledge of a voluminous historical and administrative record, which includes expert reports, research memoranda, client declarations and interview transcripts.

class: LAW 7946
class title: Federal Indian Law Practicum II
description: This ongoing clinical course is pursuing a claim against the Department of the Interior under The Judgment Funds Act on behalf of disenrolled members of the Saginaw Chippewa tribe. We have filed a complaint asking the Secretary to perform a non-discretionary action to re-enroll our clients. Because the tribe is not a necessary party we have avoided issues of sovereign immunity, but expect that it may be raised in an attempt to join the tribe. The Department has filed a motion to dismiss and we responded and are awaiting judgment. We will continue to develop strategies that will permit us to go forward regardless of the decision. Student work will entail designing an administrative appeal and preparing documents for a motion for summary judgment. Students will continue gathering and preparing evidence as well as preparing memoranda on the various tactics. The voluminous historical record remains to be fully cataloged and exhibits for the client declarations also remain to be prepared.

class: LAW 7949
class title: Federal Indian Law Practicum III
description: This ongoing practicum course represents tribes and tribal members in matters involving federal Indian law, large or small, and regardless of forum or the location of the tribe. One current case involves pursuing a claim against the Department of the Interior under The Judgment Funds Act on behalf of disenrolled members of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan. Student work on that matter includes research and document preparation related to ongoing federal court litigation, while concurrently developing a broad-based knowledge of a voluminous historical and administrative record, which includes expert reports, research memoranda, client declarations and interview transcripts.

class: LAW 7953
class title: Securities Law Clinic I
description: The course will focus on fundamental investigatory and advocacy skills applicable to representation of public investors in disputes subject to arbitration at the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (f/k/a National Association of Securities Dealers), with particular attention to the elderly and to small investors. Substantive legal topics will include the scope and nature of binding arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act and New York law, and the legal and regulatory remedies available to defrauded investors. Coursework will include training in skills such as interviewing potential clients, evaluating potential claims, preparing pleadings, conducting discovery, representing clients at hearings and negotiating settlements. Class work will include presentations by nationally-recognized experts on topics applicable to evaluation of securities accounts, trading, and products. Students will have the opportunity under faculty supervision to represent investors, to provide public education to community groups as to investment frauds, to draft position statements to regulatory authorities, and/or to participate in preparing amicus briefs, in support of public investors.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6821. 

class: LAW 7954
class title: Securities Law Clinic II
description: The course will focus on fundamental investigatory and advocacy skills applicable to representation of public investors in disputes subject to arbitration at the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (f/k/a National Association of Securities Dealers), with particular attention to the elderly and to small investors. Substantive legal topics will include the scope and nature of binding arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act and New York law, and the legal and regulatory remedies available to defrauded investors. Coursework will include training in skills such as interviewing potential clients, evaluating potential claims, preparing pleadings, conducting discovery, representing clients at hearings and negotiating settlements. Class work will include presentations by nationally-recognized experts on topics applicable to evaluation of securities accounts, trading, and products. Students will have the opportunity under faculty supervision to represent investors, to provide public education to community groups as to investment frauds, to draft position statements to regulatory authorities, and/or to participate in preparing amicus briefs, in support of public investors.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6821. 

class: LAW 7955
class title: Securities Law Clinic III
description: The course will focus on fundamental investigatory and advocacy skills applicable to representation of public investors in disputes subject to arbitration at the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (f/k/a National Association of Securities Dealers), with particular attention to the elderly and to small investors. Substantive legal topics will include the scope and nature of binding arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act and New York law, and the legal and regulatory remedies available to defrauded investors. Coursework will include training in skills such as interviewing potential clients, evaluating potential claims, preparing pleadings, conducting discovery, representing clients at hearings and negotiating settlements. Class work will include presentations by nationally-recognized experts on topics applicable to evaluation of securities accounts, trading, and products. Students will have the opportunity under faculty supervision to represent investors, to provide public education to community groups as to investment frauds, to draft position statements to regulatory authorities, and/or to participate in preparing amicus briefs, in support of public investors.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite or corequisite: LAW 6821 

class: LAW 7957
class title: Clinic Spanish Conversation
description: Spanish is the most frequently spoken non-English language in the United States. According to the Migration Policy Institute, Spanish is the predominant language spoken by limited-English-proficient ("LEP") individuals in this country, with roughly 64 percent (16.2 million) of all LEP individuals speaking Spanish. The legal profession has a responsibility to competently serve all LEP communities, and lawyers with Spanish language-accessible practices are an important resource. To support Spanish learning at the law school, we are offering this ungraded Spanish conversation course for students who are concurrently enrolled in one of the in-house clinics. To apply for the course, submit your resume and a brief statement describing your Spanish language ability. Once clinic registration is final, we will confirm that you have joined one of the in-house clinics and reach out to you regarding next steps, which may include a brief phone call to check your level of Spanish. The course will be taught by a clinical professor and a bilingual law student TA.

class: LAW 7958
class title: Advanced Spanish Clinic Conversation
description: This course is for students enrolled in a clinic in the spring 2024 semester. The class will focus on verbal and written communication and language comprehension. Please note that this class is not for students looking to learn basic Spanish conversational skills; instead, the course will focus on strengthening legal vocabulary. A minimum level of Spanish comprehension is required to enroll.

class: LAW 7959
class title: Transnational Disputes Clinic
description: Students in this course learn to use strategic litigation to influence the progressive development of the law. Clinic clients and partners include those appearing before international investor-state arbitral tribunals, national courts, such as U.S. federal courts, and other fora. Students learn key skills through acting as counsel for parties as well as for amici curiae in disputes that implicate the protection of fundamental rights. This course includes a seminar component as well as extensive, supervised work as part of a case team.

class: LAW 7964
class title: Veterans Law Practicum
description: In the Veterans Law Practicum I, students will provide information, legal advice, and representation to veterans. The student work in this practicum will directly address the gaps in legal representation for veterans seeking access to various veteran-specific benefits programs. Obtaining and accessing benefits can impact the lives of veterans in many ways: by preventing homelessness, improving a veteran's economic security and wellbeing, and providing access to medical care. Students will work on cases to secure service-connected disability compensation, discharge upgrades, overpayment issues, and other related claims. The students will interview veterans and conduct substantive research into the applicable law, including Title 38 Code of Federal Regulations, Uniform Code of Military Justice, and Federal Legislation. Students will draft legal memoranda and may prepare briefings for Veteran District Offices and/or the Board of Veterans Affairs. Students may have the opportunity to appear virtually at hearings. The students may also circulate veterans benefits information to the community in conjunction with the Tompkins County Department of Veterans Services. Students will develop key lawyering skills (including interviewing, client counseling, fact investigation, drafting, and oral advocacy), gain substantive and procedural knowledge of veteran benefits laws and regulations, and engage with the ethical implications of creating an attorney-client relationship. Students are requested to submit a statement of interest.

class: LAW 7965
class title: Veterans Law Practicum II
description: In the Veterans Law Practicum II, students will continue advocating for veterans to obtain service-connected disability compensation, discharge upgrades, and other related claims. Students may also perform research and draft memoranda on policy issues affecting veterans benefits programs. The classroom component of the course will mostly consist of case rounds, in which students discuss their current cases with fellow students and with the instructor. Advanced students will be expected to take on leadership roles within the Practicum and assist newer students with understanding the substantive and procedural issues involved in veterans advocacy.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LAW 7964 

class: LAW 7966
class title: Veterans Law Practicum III
description: The Women's Decarceration Practicum will give students the opportunity to work with incarcerated women in the following contexts: (1) effective research, writing, and mitigation investigation for post-conviction relief efforts (clemency, parole, and/or 18 U.S.C. 3582(c)); (2) prison and reentry lawyering for incarcerated and recently released women's biopsychosocial health; and (3) policy briefing and testimony preparation for legislative education opportunities. Used here, decarceration means working to address the myriad ways people affected by the criminal justice system are and remain unfree. True decarceration recognizes that release from prison is a necessary but insufficient condition for each person--and society--to scale their healthful human capacity. Commensurately, "women" is used here to include the diversity and nuance of women's lived experiences; that is, to include trans-women, cis-women, and any person who identifies as "woman," regardless of their state- or birth-assigned gender. Among other learning objectives, students will improve their client and witness interview skills, will learn how to incorporate storytelling in persuasive legal writing, will identify the nuanced and intersectional ways women experience the criminal punishment system, and will learn how to incorporate those experiences in legal advocacy. Notes: This course may require off premises travel. Students will be reimbursed for reasonable travel expenses.  Interested students should submit a resume and brief statement of interest to the professor. 

class: LAW 7991
class title: Cornell Research Colloquium
description: This seminar is a course in advanced academic research methodology. The Colloquium is designed to prepare the students to engage in doctoral-level research, analysis and writing, especially in comparative and international contexts. How is the researcher to select an object or subject of investigation? How should she formulate research questions? How should she engage in the study of foreign and domestic legal institutions, doctrines and/or cultures? How is interdisciplinary work to be accomplished?
The early portions of the course will involve discussing readings in comparative research methodology, including functionalism, Common Core analysis, legal transplant theory, historicism, law and development, legal pluralism, cultural analysis, colonial studies, and comparative institutionalism. In the latter portions of the course, students will present and critique their methodologically reflective research projects. A modest number of external speakers will be invited to present their work in progress for the purposes of generating methodologically oriented discussion.

class: LEAD 1960
class title: Leadership Training Practicum
description: In LEAD 1960 (Cornell Outdoor Education) students will enhance their COE experience through a deeper exploration of the areas of leadership, teamwork, and personal growth. They will have opportunities for practical leadership experience within a reflective learning framework. Students in this course will go through the training to become a CEP PE Instructor, Outdoor Odyssey Guide or Cornell Team and Leadership Center Facilitator before leading their own Class, Trip or Program.
outcome: Become self-aware through analyzing personal style, and assessing personal strengths, weaknesses, and motivations., Be able to practice critical reflection and apply it to learning from experience., Demonstrate basic study skills for setting priorities, time management, and stress relief., Initiate their leadership ePortfolio, which will be used throughout the minor., Apply basic leadership skills of conflict resolution, ethics, appreciating diversity, working effectively in teams., 

class: LEAD 3100
class title: Foundations in Leadership: Skills for Personal and Professional Effectiveness
description: This course frames leadership as a particular way of approaching life, one that is essential to both personal fulfillment and career effectiveness. The course begins with the inner work of a leader's personal development and then explores how leaders work through others to enhance their influence.
outcome: Develop a critical understanding of contemporary leadership theories, styles, approaches and roles., Examine and clarify personal inspirations, values, and purposes in careers and life., Learn to align those inner motivations with personal actions, decisions, and communications in order to become more authentic, effective, and influential., Build skills for communicating effectively, especially in difficult conversations such as delivering feedback, resolving conflict, and influencing others., Practice skills for building effective teams and leading group planning, decision making and problem solving processes., Create a personal learning plan and leadership portfolio for supporting personal development., Establish a habit of reflection to promote continuous learning and effective leadership., 
distribution categories: (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: LEAD 4925
class title: Leadership Minor ePortfolio
description: The purpose of this course is to demonstrate that Leadership Minor students will have met all learning outcomes in the program prior to graduation by documenting relevant in-class and co-curricular activities in their individual ePortfolio. The ePortfolio will be evaluated based on the following elements: a personal profile, leadership philosophy statement, leadership experiences, personal development, examples of how the learning outcomes for the minor have been met through the capstone experience, and reflective writing on the capstone experience. The evaluation and assignment of a grade will be made by the student's advisor using a common rubric. Ideally, students will enroll in this course in their second-to-last semester so any deficiencies can be addressed prior to graduation.
outcome: Communicate one's philosophy of leadership., Describe one's personal development as a leader., Demonstrate competency and mastery of the Leadership Minor's learning outcomes by documenting one's scholarship, training, and experience in leadership through an ePortfolio., Build a stronger relationship with one's faculty advisor., 

class: LEAD 4970
class title: Undergraduate Experience in Leadership
description: The capstone leadership experience for the Leadership Minor should be designed with a member of the faculty or staff who will directly supervise the experience, include learning outcomes, and be pre-approved by the director of the minor. The leadership experience can be directed through Cornell athletics, organized campus clubs, the Greek system, Cornell Outdoor Education, the Cornell Public Service Center, the residential system or other similar organization. Every 45 hours outside of the classroom is equivalent to one credit hour.
outcome: Demonstrate independence and leadership in a community or student organization by applying skills learned in previous leadership courses., Demonstrate a commitment to service and sense of responsibility for the greater good., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GDEV 3100.

class: LEGAL 5108
class title: Compliance Systems
description: Appropriate and efficient internal compliance helps to support the central mission of the business and control costs. This course is designed to introduce students to the basic concepts and fundamentals of the compliance function within a company or organization. It will focus on (1) the drivers behind the development of rules (2) practical issues involved in rule creation (3) the process of training, or "selling," rule systems to the appropriate people (4) policing compliance, including investigations and enforcement of rules, and (5) the consequences of failing to operate a compliance program or doing it wrong. The course relies upon case studies from businesses and organizations, with an emphasis on real life situations with the goal of understanding how to make improvements to rule systems.

class: LEGAL 5116
class title: Cybersecurity, Policy and Governance
description: This class will focus on understanding and responding to the threats facing enterprises that arise in the context of a globally interconnected economy. Students will explore the substantive and procedural steps, roles and stakeholders inside the organization and out that collaborate regularly to neutralize attacks and strengthen defenses.

class: LEGAL 5117
class title: Privacy Law, Regulation and Business
description: This course examines the legal aspects of information privacy, data protection and data security, including the privacy of electronic communications. It will review the major federal privacy statutes, the role of the federal government and designated administrative agencies in the regulation of corporate consumer privacy conduct and data protection. Attention will be given to the large gaps that exist in the protection of individual privacy rights, and to ongoing efforts to regulate emerging technologies, in light of significant international, federal, and state regulatory developments.

class: LEGAL 6100
class title: Mastering Negotiations
description: This course will introduce you to basic negotiation terminology. You will learn about the difference between distributive and integrative negotiation, and how to use each of these approaches to negotiation to create maximum value. You will then learn how to balance these two approaches in order to further your chances of making a deal and create even greater further value. By the end of the course, you will have the tools to not only split the pie but also grow the pie in a way that would benefit you and your negotiating partner. Negotiations don't necessarily have winners and losers. Through collaboration, it is possible to create value in a way that allows both parties to get most of what they want.

class: LEGAL 6103
class title: U.S. Securities Regulation
description: This course provides a general overview of the regulation of the offer and sale of securities under the Securities Act of 1933 ("Securities Act") and the reporting requirements under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 ("Exchange Act"). Topics to be covered include: the definition of "security," issues around registering securities for public sale, certain exemptions that permit sales without registration, aspects of the federal proxy rules, and certain of the antifraud provisions under the Securities Act and the Exchange Act, including Rule 10b-5, and insider trading. The course is designed for a student interested in gaining a general familiarity of the basics of the federal securities laws.

class: LEGAL 7100
class title: Capstone Project I
description: This substantial written project will involve in depth study of a topic selected by the student together with their capstone advisor. The project can involve applying what students learned in the program to issues specific to their work place. 

class: LGBT 3635
class title: Queer Classics
description: This course engages classical antiquity and its reception through the prism of queer studies. Cruising Homer, Sappho, Euripides, Plato, Ovid and more, we will explore how queer theoretical frameworks help us account for premodern queer and trans bodies, desires, experiences, and aesthetics. We will trace how people historically have engaged with the classical past in political and affective projects of writing queer history and literature, constructing identities and communities, and imagining queer futures. We will unpack how classical scholarship might reproduce contemporary forms of homophobia and transphobia in its treatments of gender, sexuality, and embodiment in the classical past, and in turn how modern uses of the classical might reinforce or dismantle exclusionary narratives around 'queerness' today as it intersects with race, gender, sexuality, and class. Finally, we will consider how the work we are doing in this class (where the 'Queer' in 'Queer Classics' may be taken as an adjective or an imperative) relates to the ways that contemporary writers, activists, artists, and performers have animated the classical past with queer possibilities. All readings will be in translation; no knowledge of Latin and Greek is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: LGBT 3740
class title: Parody
description: In A Theory of Parody, Linda Hutcheon defines parody broadly as "repetition with critical difference, which marks difference rather than similarity." Taking a cue from Hutcheon, we will consider parody as a form of meaning making that is not necessarily used in the service of ridicule. Rather, we will examine a number of late-twentieth- and early-twenty-first-century imitative works in order to distinguish the rich variety of political agendas and aesthetic rationales for recent parody. An emphasis on postmodern or contemporary performances and media that renovate images, ideas, and icons from modernism and modernity will unite our otherwise diverse efforts. Some of these efforts will also highlight what happens when an artist takes up a work made for one platform (for example, theatre, performance art, installation, cinema, television, the Web) and parodies it in another. Creators and works under consideration may range from Christopher Durang, Split Britches, and Pig Iron Theatre Company to The Simpsons, Cookie's Fortune, and Strindberg and Helium.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LGBT 3990
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study
description: Individual study program intended for juniors and seniors working on special topics with selected reading or research projects not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with an LGBT Studies faculty member who has agreed to supervise independent study.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LGBT 2290 and one additional LGBT Studies course at the 3000-level.

class: LGBT 4100
class title: The Seminar
description: Topics vary by instructor.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LGBT 4695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LGBT 4835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LGBT 6312
class title: Synthesizing Pop: Electronics and the Musical Imagination
description: From Switched-On Bach to Synthpop and EDM, since the late 1960s electronic synthesizers have expanded the sonic palette and identity formation of popular musicians, leading to new concepts of sound and performance as well as communal, technological, and human interfaces. This course will explore the cultural history of analog synthesizers and their progeny of digital devices (samplers, sequencers, drum machines) and desktop technologies that revolutionized popular music soundscapes and embodiment. Synthesis will be considered as both a musical technology and theoretical concept that together spark imagined cyborg identities and post-human futures, challenging and resynthesizing categories of gender, sexuality, and race. Student will also have the opportunity to engage with Cornell's Robert Moog Archive and develop research, creative, or curation projects. This course is open to graduate students and fourth-year undergraduates by permission. Undergraduates should contact the instructor before enrolling.

class: LGBT 6445
class title: Modernist Fiction and the Erotics of Style
description: "I am interested in language because it wounds or seduces me," the critic Roland Barthes once wrote. How do we take pleasure in a text, even when it appears to betray us? How do we speak of the erotics of style beyond the mere thematic interpretation of sexual representation? Has such an erotics even been written yet? To explore a methodology for contemplating this elusive embrace between the aesthetic and the erotic, we will consider influential works of psychoanalytic, deconstructive, feminist, and queer theory alongside a survey of great modernist novelists whose innovative experiments in prose style have proved most sensual and most challenging, among them Oscar Wilde, Henry James, Gertrude Stein, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Ronald Firbank, and Djuna Barnes.

class: LING 1100
class title: FWS: Language, Thought, and Reality
description: In this course the students learn the skill of writing at the university level. Instructors offer themes for their courses within their own special areas of expertise.  
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: LING 1101
class title: Introduction to Linguistics
description: Overview of the science of language, especially its theoretical underpinnings, methods, and major findings. Areas covered include: the relation between sound and meaning in human languages, social variation in language, language change over time, universals of language, and the mental representation of linguistic knowledge. Students are introduced to a wide variety of language phenomena, drawn not only from languages resembling English, but also from many that appear to be quite unlike English, such as those native to the Americas, Africa, Asia, Australia, and the South Pacific.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: LING 1104
class title: WIM: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This section is highly recommended for students who are interested in learning about the topics covered in the main course through writing and discussion. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: LING 1170.

class: LING 1170
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: LING 2221
class title: Language and Society
description: In this writing intensive course, we will explore how language and society affect each other. How do class, age, ethnicity, gender, and geography affect the way people speak? Why are some ways of speaking considered prestigious and others stigmatized? How does increased use of online communication and social media affect how we communicate? How are power relations captured in language? How does national policy-e.g., "English-only" policies-affect both politics and language use? What are the linguistic issues behind the Ebonics debate? In this course, through extensive discussion and various types of writing, we consider these questions both in the context of the United States and other parts of the world.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: LING 2224
class title: Introduction to Language Endangerment and Revitalization
description: An introduction to the study of language endangerment and language revitalization. Explores why nearly half of the world's languages are facing extinction over the current century, discusses the issues related to that projection, and introduces approaches to maintaining and revitalizing endangered languages.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: LING 2261
class title: Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics
description: An introduction to the phonology, morphology, and syntax of Proto-Indo-European and the chief historical developments of the daughter languages.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: LING 3150
class title: Language and Power
description: In this course, we will explore how language interacts with power: how does language reflect, shape, threaten and reinforce power relations in human society? From childhood through old age, language is an ever-present source of symbolic power. We use it to develop and express our identities, to position ourselves in hierarchies, and to establish group membership and exclusion throughout life. Language shapes ourselves, our families, our social lives, and our institutions. Understanding how people use language can provide a window into hidden aspects of both individuals and the social world.
outcome: To develop skills for thinking, speaking, and writing critically about social scientific questions., To apply these skills in analyzing the papers we discuss in class., To understand the role of language in the social world and its power structures., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: LING 3303
class title: Introduction to Syntax and Semantics
description: This course explores both syntax (how words and phrases are combined into sentences) and semantics (how the meanings of words, phrases, and sentences are interpreted). The course aims to give students to the ability to address questions regarding syntactic and semantic properties of languages in a rigorous and informed fashion. Topics covered include phrase structure, grammatical relations, transformations, semantic composition, modification, quantification, and the syntax/semantics interface. Emphasis throughout the course is placed on forming and testing hypotheses.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 1101 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 3315
class title: Old Norse I
description: Old Norse is a collective term for the earliest North Germanic literary languages: Old Icelandic, Old Norwegian, Old Danish, and Old Swedish. The richly documented Old Icelandic is the center of attention, and the purpose is twofold: the students gain knowledge of an ancient North Germanic language, important from a linguistic point of view, and gain access to the medieval Icelandic (and Scandinavian) literature. The structure of Old Norse (Old Icelandic), phonology, and morphology, with reading of selections from the Prose-Edda, a 13th-century narrative based on the Eddaic poetry. 

class: LING 3324
class title: Cayuga Language and Culture
description: An introduction to the language and culture of the Cayuga (Gayogo̱hó꞉nǫʼ) people. Basic language instruction provided in an immersive learning environment, focusing on the relationship of language and culture to plants and growing.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: LING 3390
class title: Independent Study in Linguistics
description: Independent study of linguistics topics not covered in regular curriculum for undergrads.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 1101, and permission of instructor.

class: LING 4401
class title: Phonology I
description: Provides an introduction to phonological theory. The empirical basis, theoretical approaches, and relevant literature are explored through extensive data analysis and critical reading.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3302 [B+ or above] or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4403
class title: Syntax I
description: An advanced introduction to syntactic theory within the principles and parameters/minimalist frameworks. Topics include phrase structure, argument structure (unaccusative verbs, unergative verbs, double object constructions), principles of word order, and the binding theory.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3303 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4419
class title: Phonetics I
description: This course provides advanced instruction in phonetic analysis and experimental methodology. Students learn about various theories of speech perception, production, and cognitive representation. This provides a background in which students develop an original research project. The goals of this course are for students to gain a conceptual understanding of phonetic analyses and to acquire practical experience in using phonetic analyses to explore cognitive dimensions of speech.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3302 [B+ or above] or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4421
class title: Semantics I
description: Introduces methods for theorizing about meaning within generative grammar. These techniques allow the creation of grammars that pair syntactic structures with meanings. Students look at several empirical areas in detail, among them complementation (combining heads with their arguments), modification, conjunction, definite descriptions, relative clauses, traces, bound pronouns, and quantification. An introduction to logical and mathematical concepts used in linguistic semantics (e.g., set theory, functions and their types, and the lambda notation for naming linguistic meanings) is included in the course.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SMR-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3303 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4434
class title: Computational Linguistics II
description: An in-depth exploration of modern computational linguistic techniques. A continuation of  LING 4424 - Computational Linguistics I. Whereas LING 4424 covers foundational techniques in symbolic computational modeling, this course will cover a wider range of applications as well as coverage of neural network methods. We will survey a range of neural network techniques that are widely used in computational linguistics and natural language processing as well as a number of techniques that can be used to probe the linguistic information and language processing strategies encoded in computational models. We will examine ways of mapping this linguistic information both to linguistic theory as well as to measures of human processing (e.g., neuroimaging data and human behavioral responses).
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 4424 and one other 3000 level or above linguistics course.

class: LING 4451
class title: Greek Comparative Grammar
description: The prehistory and evolution of the sounds and forms of ancient Greek as reconstructed by comparison with the other Indo-European languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: thorough familiarity with morphology of classical Greek.

class: LING 4491
class title: Honors Research Workshop I
description: This course provides structure and guidance to students doing an honors thesis in linguistics. The course consists of biweekly meeting of all honors thesis writers with the course instructor. Students will prepare presentations and written materials including topic, background, outline, methodology for honors project for class presentation and discussion. The course also covers aspects of linguistics research methodology.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: LING 4493 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4493
class title: Honors Thesis Research
description: Directed honors thesis research for students working on an honors thesis, taken with the student's honors thesis chair or other committee member.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: LING 4491 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 4712
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: LING 6261
class title: Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics
description: An introduction to the phonology, morphology, and syntax of Proto-Indo-European and the chief historical developments of the daughter languages.

class: LING 6324
class title: Cayuga Language and Culture
description: An introduction to the language and culture of the Cayuga (Gayogo̱hó꞉nǫʼ) people. Basic language instruction provided in an immersive learning environment, focusing on the relationship of language and culture to plants and growing.

class: LING 6401
class title: Phonology I
description: Provides an introduction to phonological theory. The empirical basis, theoretical approaches, and relevant literature are explored through extensive data analysis and critical reading.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3302 (B+ or above) or equivalent, or permission of instructor.

class: LING 6403
class title: Syntax I
description: An advanced introduction to syntactic theory within the principles and parameters/minimalist frameworks. Topics include phrase structure, argument structure (unaccusative verbs, unergative verbs, double object constructions), principles of word order, and the binding theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3303 or permission of instructor.

class: LING 6419
class title: Phonetics I
description: This course provides advanced instruction in phonetic analysis and experimental methodology. Students learn about various theories of speech perception, production, and cognitive representation. This provides a background in which students develop an original research project. The goals of this course are for students to gain a conceptual understanding of phonetic analyses and to acquire practical experience in using phonetic analyses to explore cognitive dimensions of speech.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3302 (B+ or above) or permission of instructor.

class: LING 6421
class title: Semantics I
description: Introduces methods for theorizing about meaning within generative grammar. These techniques allow the creation of grammars that pair syntactic structures with meanings. Students look at several empirical areas in detail, among them complementation (combining heads with their arguments), modification, conjunction, definite descriptions, relative clauses, traces, bound pronouns, and quantification. An introduction to logical and mathematical concepts used in linguistic semantics (e.g., set theory, functions and their types, and the lambda notation for naming linguistic meanings) is included in the course.

class: LING 6434
class title: Computational Linguistics II

class: LING 6451
class title: Greek Comparative Grammar
description: The prehistory and evolution of the sounds and forms of ancient Greek as reconstructed by comparison with the other Indo-European languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: thorough familiarity with morphology of classical Greek.

class: LING 6634
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: LING 6692
class title: Phonetic Data Analysis Workshop
description: The phonetics data analysis workshop provides students with practice in analysis and visualization of phonetic data, using Matlab, R, and Praat. Experiment design and statistical methods are emphasized.

class: LING 6693
class title: Computational Psycholinguistics Discussion
description: This seminar provides a venue for feedback on research projects, invited speakers, and paper discussions within the area of computational psycholinguistics.

class: LING 7701
class title: Directed Research
description: An independent study for graduate students.

class: LING 7710
class title: Computational Seminar
description: Addresses current theoretical and empirical issues in computational linguistics.

class: LING 7711
class title: Semantics Seminar
description: Addresses current theoretical and empirical issues in semantics.

class: LING 7713
class title: Phonetics Seminar
description: Addresses current theoretical and empirical issues in phonetics.

class: LING 7727
class title: Topics in Current Linguistic Theory
description: Topics in Current Linguistic Theory: topics of current research that cross sub-disciplinary boundaries.

class: LSP 2100
class title: Introduction to Latinx Studies
description: This course is an introduction to Latina/o Studies, an interdisciplinary field of knowledge production that focuses on historical, sociopolitical, cultural, and economic experiences of Latinx peoples in the United States—both as a nation and as a geopolitical location in a larger world. We will survey and analyze the arts, histories, cultures, politics, and sociological landscapes of Puerto Ricans, Dominican Americans, Cuban Americans, Mexican Americans, Central Americans, as well as other Latinx peoples who have made communities within the United States for centuries, and who are part of Latinx diasporas. Intersections of U.S. Latinx identities are also explored in this course by asking questions related to the fields housed within Latina/o Studies: How is Latina/o/x identity defined and performed? What does the use of an 'x' in Latinx mean or do? How do histories of race, class, gender, and sexuality in the U.S. impact one's Latina/o/x identity?  Many of these questions will be answered by using scholarship produced by the Latina/o Studies Program faculty at Cornell, familiarizing students with the breadth of research and expertise of program.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: LSP 2253
class title: Diasporas from the Spanish Caribbean
description: This seminar examines the Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican diasporas in the United States. We will examine US relations with these three countries; the root causes of this Caribbean migration; their history in particular urban areas of the United States; and the political, social, and cultural issues that have attracted attention.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: LSP 2400
class title: Introduction to U.S. Latinx Literature
description: Latina/os have always been part of U.S. history, yet the media often represents Latinx as only recent immigrants or as stereotypes that reduce rich cultures into a single, unified category or group of people. This practice hides the many unique and varied voices, stories, experiences, and ideas produced by Latinx expressive practices in forms ranging from novels and poetry to podcasts, tiktoks, films, theater, comics, memoirs, visual arts, and dance. This course will sample all of these forms while considering how artists meditate on their experiences of home, friendship, languages, love, migration, education, racialization, within the contexts of histories of colonization, discrimination, war, invasion, revolution, and ongoing activist organizing for resistance, sustainability, and thriving futures. In addition to common material, students will also have the chance to explore specific expressive practices that interest them.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: LSP 3010
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: LSP 3678
class title: Diasporas, Disasters, and Dissent: Re-Thinking Puerto Rican Studies in the 20th and 21st Centuries
description: "Foreign in a domestic sense" is the perplexing way that the Supreme Court of the United States chose to define Puerto Rico's status in the so-called "Insular Cases" of the early 20th century. Written over 100 years ago, this contradictory ruling looms large over Puerto Rico's precarious legal standing, despite the fact that there are now more Puerto Ricans living on the US mainland than in the island itself. Seeking to counter the obfuscation of Puerto Rico in the US imaginary, in this course students will analyze how key historical, political, and social moments connected to diasporas, disasters, and dissent have galvanized Puerto Rican cultural production in the 20th and 21st centuries.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: LSP 3770
class title: Latinos and the United States, 1492-1880
description: In this course, we will answer two major questions: What is Latino history? And how should we write Latino History? We will explore these questions without attempting to cover all of Latino history before 1800. We will focus on a variety of experiences to better understand how differences in race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, and class have shaped Latino communities over time. We will read academic journal articles and books (secondary sources) and documents from the past, such as diaries, letters, court records, and maps (primary sources). Throughout the semester we will be working in groups toward creating a final project: a Latino history website.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: LSP 3810
class title: Migration: Histories, Controversies, and Perspectives
description: This introductory course introduces students to issues and debates related to international migration and will provide an interdisciplinary foundation to understanding the factors that shape migration flows and migrant experiences. We will start by reviewing theories of the state and historical examples of immigrant racialization and exclusion in the United States and beyond. We will critically examine the notions of borders, citizenship/non-citizenship, and the creation of diasporas. Students will also hear a range of perspectives by exposing them to Cornell guest faculty who do research and teach on migration across different disciplines and methodologies and in different world areas. Examples include demographic researchers concerned with immigrant inequality and family formation, geographic perspectives on the changing landscapes of immigrant metropolises, legal scholarship on the rights of immigrant workers, and the study of immigrant culture from a feminist studies lens. Offered each fall semester.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: LSP 4000
class title: Contemporary Issues in Latin - Latino America
description: Interested in Latino Studies and Latin American Studies? This course will explore topics in Anthropology, Art, Economics, History, Literature, Government, Sociology, etc., of US Latino and Latin American contexts. Course features guest speakers from Cornell and other institutions.

class: LSP 4210
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study
description: Guided independent study.

class: LSP 4851
class title: Refugees
description: Since World War II, over 4 million people have migrated to the United States as refugees. In this seminar we will examine some of these refugee migrations and the ways these migrations challenged our understanding of the United States as a "haven for the oppressed." We will examine the crafting of refugee/asylum policy, the role of nongovernmental actors in influencing policy, and the ways policy reflected foreign-policy interests and security concerns. The last weeks of the course will pay particular attention to climate refugees and asylum-seekers, and our changing definitions of who 'merits' protection in the United States.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: LSP 6000
class title: Contemporary Issues in Latin-Latino America
description: Interested in Latino Studies and Latin American Studies? This course will explore topics in Anthropology, Art, Economics, History, Literature, Government, Sociology, etc., of US Latino and Latin American contexts. Course features guest speakers from Cornell and other institutions.

class: LSP 6020
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: LSP 6210
class title: Graduate Student Independent Study
description: Guided independent study.

class: LSP 6851
class title: Refugees
description: Since World War II, over 4 million people have migrated to the United States as refugees. In this seminar we will examine some of these refugee migrations and the ways these migrations challenged our understanding of the United States as a "haven for the oppressed." We will examine the crafting of refugee/asylum policy, the role of nongovernmental actors in influencing policy, and the ways policy reflected foreign-policy interests and security concerns. The last weeks of the course will pay particular attention to climate refugees and asylum-seekers, and our changing definitions of who 'merits' protection in the United States.

class: MAE 1170
class title: Introduction to Mechanical Engineering
description: Introduction to fundamentals of mechanical and aerospace engineering. Students learn and understand topics such as stress and strain, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, automotive engineering, and engineering design and product development. Emphasis is placed on critically examining problem solutions to begin developing engineering intuition. Key components of the class include in-class discussions, homework, laboratory experiments, and a group design project.
outcome: Students will be able to gain a basic understanding of four major areas of the mechanical engineering curriculum: statics, mechanics of materials, fluid mechanics, and thermal sciences., Students will be able to identify a system and its interactions with surroundings; they will use this approach to solve problems in both mechanical and thermal/fluids systems., Students will gain experience with unit conversion, estimation, approximations, and critical thinking., Students will be able to design and build a device (e.g. a small battery-powered car), and perform and document laboratory experiments., Students will be able to become aware of current problems, issues, successes, entrepreneurship opportunities, design trade-offs, and failures in the mechanical and aerospace field., 

class: MAE 1900
class title: First-Year Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering
description: Individual research studies for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students must first make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and then submit an enrollment form, available online at https://www.mae.cornell.edu/mae/programs/undergraduate-programs/undergraduate-forms. Once approved, students will receive an enrollment pin to enroll in MAE 1900. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project. May not be used as a technical elective in the ME major. 

class: MAE 2020
class title: Statics and Mechanics of Solids
description: This course presents the methods for analyzing deformable structures in equilibrium. It is fundamental to mechanical analysis and design and is the basis for many advanced courses and professions in mechanical, civil, materials, biomedical and biological engineering.
outcome: Students will be able to draw complete and correct free body diagrams., Students will be able to apply the principle of equilibrium to calculate external and internal forces in simple, statically determinant mechanical systems, including simple shear and bending moment distributions., Students will be able to use key terminology related to stress, strain, deformation and elasticity along with analyzing the stress, strain and deformation in bars subject to axial, bending and torsional loads., Students will be able to use the principles of elasticity and equilibrium to solve for stresses in simple statically indeterminate systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112. Corequisite: MATH 1920.

class: MAE 2210
class title: Thermodynamics
description: Presents the definitions, concepts, and laws of thermodynamics. Topics include the first and second laws, thermodynamic property relationships, and applications to vapor and gas power systems, refrigeration, and heat pump systems. Examples and problems are related to contemporary aspects of energy and power generation and to broader environmental issues.
outcome: Students will be able to choose an appropriate system and identify interactions between system and surroundings., Students will be able to obtain values of thermodynamic properties for a pure substance in a given state, using tables, relations for incompressible substances, and relations for gases., Students will be able to apply energy and entropy balances in the control mass (closed system) and control volume formulations to the analysis of devices and cycles., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920 and PHYS 1112.

class: MAE 3050
class title: Introduction to Aeronautics
description: This course is an overview of the engineering science relevant to the design of aircraft. It is a course in applied aerodynamics, designed to develop the engineering background required to understand the principal aerodynamic constraints involved in the design of heavier-than-air, atmospheric flight vehicles. Basic concepts in fluid mechanics and aerodynamics are reviewed and described in the context of their relevance to the performance of aircraft and to the stability and controllability of flight vehicles. The fluid mechanical theory for lift and drag forces is developed, the characteristics of aircraft propulsive systems are explored, and the two are brought together to investigate the performance of typical aircraft.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the basic elements of aerodynamic lift, drag, and moments forming the basis for flight., Students will be able to analyze the motion of aircraft to obtain performance, stability and control information., Students will be able to perform computer based solutions of problems related to aeronautics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 2030. Prerequisite or corequisite: ENGRD 2210 or BEE 2220, MAE 3230 or CHEME 3230 or BEE 3310 or CEE 3310. 

class: MAE 3120
class title: Mechanical Properties of Materials, Processing, and Design
description: Relationship between microscopic mechanisms and macroscopic mechanical behavior of engineering materials, how mechanical properties can be modified, and criteria for selection and use of materials in design. Stress, strain and elastic constants as tensor quantities, viscoelasticity and damping, plastic deformation, creep deformation, fracture, and fatigue.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2610 or a combination of courses similar to ENGRD 2020, MAE 3130/MSE 2060, and MSE 3040 (at least two of the three).

class: MAE 3230
class title: Introductory Fluid Mechanics
description: Topics include physical properties of fluids, hydrostatics, conservation laws using control volume analysis and using differential analysis, Bernoulli's equation, potential flows, simple viscous flows (solved with Navier-Stokes equations), dimensional analysis, pipe flows, boundary layers. Introduction to compressible flow.
outcome: Students will be able to use the fundamental principles and mathematical basis underlying the conservation equations., Students will be able to identify the guiding principles in a given fluid problem, to formulate the governing equations, and so to solve basic engineering problems., Students will be able to recognize solutions with and without vorticity, and understand the limitations of the solutions for real practical fluid flows.  Understand the difference between a simple solution and a real practical problem., Students will be able to understand where their analysis might involve approximations and empirical approaches; for example, pipe flows and boundary layer flows., Students will be able to improve their ability to formulate an ordered approach to problem solving, using words of explanation in derivations, and algebra before substituting numerical values that allows neat analytical solutions and dimensional analysis., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020, MAE 2030. Prerequisite or corequisite: ENGRD 2210. 

class: MAE 3260
class title: System Dynamics
description: Dynamic behavior of mechanical systems: modeling, analysis techniques, and applications; vibrations of single- and multidegree- of-freedom systems; feedback control systems. Computer simulation and experimental studies of vibration and control systems.
outcome: Student will be able to build an accurate dynamic model of a complex mechanical or electromechanical system by a divide-and-conquer approach that makes use of physics, constitutive laws, geometry, and whatever other information one may have about the system., Students will be able to use linear and nonlinear system simulation and analysis tools to study transient and frequency response of systems., Students will be able to use modern dynamics and control lab equipment to measure, record and analyze system response., Students will be able to choose appropriate values for model parameters to meet passive or open-loop performance specifications on dynamic response., Students will be able to design closed-loop feedback controllers to meet performance specifications on dynamic response., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930, MATH 2940, and MAE 2030.

class: MAE 3270
class title: Mechanics of Engineering Materials
description: This course will offer students opportunities to perform preliminary design and analysis of structures and mechanical components and to select materials to meet design objectives and constraints.  To do so, students will extend their knowledge of and ability to apply solid and structural mechanics topics including general states of stress and strain, elasticity, coordinate transformations, energy methods, effects of combined loading and mechanical testing.  The use of multipe failure criteria including yielding, brittle failure, fatigue and fracture as part of design calculations to meet stiffness, strength and other performace criteria is emphasized.  Students are introduced to the structure, processing and mechanical properties of metals, polymers, ceramics and composites.  A formal approach to mateirals selection is introduced and applied.
outcome: Students will be able to perform preliminary design of simple structures and components considering strength, fatigue, fracture, stiffness and material suitability for a given purpose., Students will be able to break down problems into component parts and correctly perform calculations for stress, deflection, strength, fatigue life and fracture resistance., Students will be able to describe basic tests of mechanical properties of materials and to correctly define and use associated terms., Students will be able to describe the structure, processing, and properties of the basic classes of engineering materials: metals, polymers, ceramics, and composites., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020, MATH 2940, CS 1112 or CS 1110.

class: MAE 3870
class title: Fundamentals of Electric-Drive Vehicle Engineering
description: The course covers the engineering fundamentals and basic design of electric-drive vehicles by analyzing the relevant physics and applying the relevant equations and simple models.  The course reviews transportation electrification history, electric vehicle architecture, powertrain components and their modeling and control.
outcome: Students will be able to explain the fundamental concepts of range and energy storage., Students will be able to perform calculations using efficiencies and loads to estimate range., Students will be able to perform calculations relating to the combination of cells to form battery packs, and the tradeoffs of voltage versus capacity., Students will be able to describe the key operating characteristics of induction electric motors., Students will be able calculate the mpge and other efficiency metrics for various drive cycles., Students will be able to perform modeling of some specific electric vehicle systems, using MATLAB and/or Python scripts., Students will be able to describe the performance and model the control systems of specialized low-speed electric vehicle systems such as wheelchairs, assistive scooters, and material handling equipment., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2213, MAE 2030, and MATH 2930.

class: MAE 4060
class title: Introduction to Spaceflight Mechanics
description: Introduction to spacecraft orbit mechanics, attitude dynamics, and the design and implementation of spaceflight maneuvers for satellites, probes, and rockets. Topics in celestial mechanics include orbital elements, types &amp; uses of orbits, coordinate systems, Kepler's equation, the restricted three-body problem, interplanetary trajectories, the rocket equation and staging, Clohessy-Wiltshire equations and relative formation flight, drag and orbital decay, and propulsive maneuvers. Topics in attitude dynamics include kinematics, Euler's equations, stability of spinning spacecraft, attitude perturbations such as gravity-gradient and magnetic torques, equations of motion of rigid spacecraft with momentum actuators and thrusters, attitude maneuvers such as nutation control and reorientation, low-speed fluid behaviors, and elementary feedback control of linearized attitude and orbit dynamics. Principles of spacecraft propulsion technology and attitude-control technology are introduced along with the rocket equation and staging. The course includes discussions of current problems and trends in spacecraft operation and development.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the fundamentals of spaceflight mechanics and how high-level mission requirements drive the design of orbits and attitude for contemporary spacecraft., Students will be able to understand the application of Kepler's laws for orbital motion, how to propagate an orbit, and calculate parameters associated with mission operations, including launch, insertion, and interplanetary transfers., Students will be able to understand the application of Euler's equations for rigid-body motion to spacecraft dynamics, attitude representations, attitude kinematics, how to predict and model spacecraft attitude motions, and how to achieve desirable attitude-dynamics behaviors., Students will be able to simulate a spacecraft in orbit using state of the art tools and identify and characterize the astrodynamics capabilities of a preliminary spacecraft design., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930, MATH 2940, and MAE 2030. 

class: MAE 4240
class title: Materials Processing and Manufacturing
description: How a material is made into its final form has great importance to its structure and therefore to its properties and performance. This course is aimed at giving students an understanding of the state-of-the-art material processing and manufacturing technologies as well as how these processes influence materials' microstructure and properties. With a unified approach this course will introduce the fundamentals of materials processing applied to metals, ceramics, and polymers. Different material processing routes from melt-based and powder-based processes to shape forming, joining, surface engineering and additive manufacturing will be discussed. Emphasis will be placed on the physics of the process as well as on how the processes will influence the properties of emerging materials and applications.
outcome: Describe the physics of materials processes and manufacturing technologies., Identify and explain process-microstructure-property relationships for different materials processes., Design processing routes and justify process selection for a desired performance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 or ENGRD 2610.

class: MAE 4272
class title: Fluids and Heat Transfer Laboratory
description: Laboratory exercises in fluid mechanics and the thermal sciences. Measurements of flame temperature, pressure, heat transfer, viscosity, lift and drag, fluid-flow rate, effects of turbulence, airfoil stall, flow visualization, and spark ignition engine performance. Instrumentation, techniques and analysis, and interpretation of results. Biweekly written assignments with extensive feedback.
outcome: Students will be able to experience in performing diverse experiments in fluid mechanics and the thermal sciences; extensive analysis of data., Students will be able to become familiar with instrumentation for fluids and thermal science experiments., Students will be able to experience in applying concepts from junior-year fluid mechanics and heat transfer classes., Students will be able to analyze experimental results and their uncertainties, and interpret them; and also to communicate these interpretations effectively., Students will be able to use graphics and words to present and discuss experimental results effectively., Students will be able to practice and feedback on Engineering Communication., Students will be able to experience working on a team to collect experimental data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 3230, MAE 3240.

class: MAE 4291
class title: Supervised Senior Design Experience
description: Substantial design experience based on the knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work and incorporating engineering standards and realistic constraints. Sections of this course satisfy the BS ME senior design requirement. Sections are directed by a faculty member as an individual or a team design exercise. Students must first make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and then submit an enrollment form, available online at https://www.mae.cornell.edu/mae/programs/undergraduate-programs/undergraduate-forms. Once approved, students will receive an enrollment pin to enroll in MAE 4291.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MAE 4300.

class: MAE 4300
class title: Engineers and Society
description: This course aims to give students a broad grasp of the roles and responsibilities of engineers in contributing to societal well-being by integrating perspectives from sociocultural and humanistic studies with science and technology. The course will explore how the process of applying engineering principles can impact society, including environmental sustainability, diversity and equity, and ethics. Students will be familiarized with concepts related to engineering standards and regulations, sustainable development goals, sustainability reporting, community engagement, and the ethics and the governance of artificial intelligence. These concepts will then be used to explore the larger context of how social factors interact with engineering science and technology.
outcome: Students will identify how engineering principles and practices are interwoven with societal impact., Students will identify ways to foster scientific innovation that enhance positive social outcomes., Students will demonstrate competency in the fundamentals of community-engaged engineering and ethical reasoning., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: M.E. Senior Design.

class: MAE 4320
class title: Integrated Micro Sensors and Actuators: Bridging the Physical and Digital Worlds
description: Introduction to micro and nano devices that allow the digital world to both sense and actuate in the physical world. Design and analysis of modern MEMS/NEMS (Micro/Nano Electromechanical Systems) touch, accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure, microphones, neural probe sensors. Design and analysis of electrostatic, piezoelectric, thermal, and magnetic actuators for frequency control and micro robotic applications. This is an interdisciplinary course drawing from mechanics, materials, solid state devices, CMOS electronics, and micro and nano fabrication. The students design, fabricate, and test a microsensor chip to implement class concepts.
outcome: Be able to design and model a digital app-based electronic interface to integrated sensors., Be able to model spring-mass equivalent models of micro/nano fabricated structures, using analysis and finite-element analysis software., Be able to use individual fabrication steps into a device fabrication process flow., Be able to design and model electromechanical models of planar surface micromachined accelerometers and gyroscopes., Be able to design membrane based sensors and actuators such as pressure monitors and microphones., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 2100 or equivalent.

class: MAE 4341
class title: Innovative Product Design via Digital Manufacturing
description: This hands-on/project-based course instructs students on methods to identify product concepts for machine designs with commercial potential. It combines lectures and field/lab activities on the new product development cycle: iterative design based on ethnographic fieldwork, team brainstorming, prototyping, testing/consumer feedback, and limitations set by mass manufacturing. Students –coming from diverse backgrounds and industry experience, and some currently working in different companies -will be teamed together to develop the new products.They will be given a common design challenge, and after observingand engagingwith real users, they will identify specific needs; then based on those needs each team will end up with a different problem definition and a different product. Industry advisersfrom real world companies will provide constant feedback throughout the semester.
outcome: Students will be able to experience the major impact of a human-centered design approach., Students will be able to understand the logic of the product development cycle in the context of both a startup company and an established firm., Students will be able to appreciate the limitations of early-stage prototypes and the importance of staged development into more realistic prototypes., Students will be able to identify product platforms for mechanical design with commercial potential., Students will be able to appreciate Intellectual Property in terms of design and utility., The student will be able to acquire familiarity with basic tools of design and manufacturing, such as CAD and digital manufacturing tools., 

class: MAE 4351
class title: Interdisciplinary Design Concepts
description: This course emphasizes entrepreneurial driven technology designs (forward engineering) by integrating mechanical, chemical, and materials engineering through the understanding of early stage product development complexities. These complexities include staging invention and innovation via the critical selection of materials, assessing product mechanics and processes for final product function, performance, reliability, cost and technical marketability. Students will attend lectures, participate in establishing a Tech Startup integrated into the Johnson School MBA mentoring program, attend startup design reviews, give a series of individual/group presentations, and write a startup issue paper.

class: MAE 4480
class title: Biomechanics Laboratory
description: This course focuses on mastering experimental techniques related to measuring the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials and biological tissues. Students will learn techniques for measuring mechanical properties of cardiovascular and musculoskeletal tissues in tension, compression, shear, and bending. Students will learn to apply non-linear models to describe the behavior of elastic, viscoelastic, poroelastic, and hyperelastic materials.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BME 3410 or BME 3210.

class: MAE 4540
class title: Propulsion of Spacecraft
description: This course provides the contextual and physical framework to understand and design space propulsion devices for orbiting spacecraft and satellite systems. An introduction to the basic principles of propulsion and performance metrics in the context of space missions are presented. Key physics underlying the operation of propulsion devices are covered. Specifically, the design and performance of ion engines, Hall thrusters, electrospray thrusters, and emerging propulsion concepts are covered.
outcome: Students will be conversant across the range of propulsion options for space missions., Students will be able to describe the physics underlying their operation and performance limits., Students will be able to use their knowledge of propulsion physics and mission context to create or evaluate new designs., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: undergraduate-level coursework in thermodynamics, electromagnetism, and orbital mechanics.

class: MAE 4650
class title: Biofluid Mechanics
description: For description and learning outcomes, see MAE 4650.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 and ENGRD 2202 or MAE 3230 or equivalents, or permission of instructor.

class: MAE 4660
class title: Biomedical Engineering Analysis of Metabolic and Structural Systems
description: This course focuses on applying techniques of engineering analysis to quantify function and dysfunction of human physiologic systems. Thematic areas include the cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, and renal systems. Emphasis will be placed on developing mathematical models to understand function and dysfunction across tissue scales, and implementing these with experimental data to make biomedical engineering judgments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020, BIOMG 1350 or BME 2010 or BIOG 1440 or permission of instuctor required.

class: MAE 4700
class title: Finite Element Analysis for Mechanical and Aerospace Design
description: Introduction to linear finite element static analysis for discrete and distributed mechanical and aerospace structures. Prediction of load, deflection, stress, strain, and temperature distributions. Major emphasis on underlying mechanics and mathematical formulation. Introduction to computational aspects via educational and commercial software (such as MATLAB and ANSYS). Selected mechanical and aerospace applications in the areas of trusses, beams, frames, heat transfer, and elasticity. A selection of advanced topics such as dynamic modal analysis, transient heat transfer, or design optimization techniques may also be covered, time permitting.
outcome: Students will be able to recall, identify, and analyze the mathematical and physical principles underlying the FEM as applied to solid mechanics, thermal analysis and select aspects of fluid mechanics., Students will be able to develop their own FEM computer programs, for mathematically simple but physically challenging problems, in MATLAB., Students will be able to compare FEM results obtained with MATLAB with those obtained from ANSYS. Analyze more complex problems (in solid mechanics or thermal analysis) using the commercial FEM code ANSYS., Students will be able to demonstrate the ability to design a component using FEM analysis (both MATLAB AND ANSYS)., Students will be able to make clear and effective technical presentations, both in terms of form as well as content, of his/her work and write clear technical reports describing his/her work., 

class: MAE 4730
class title: Intermediate Dynamics
description: The course emphasizes the classical dynamics of single- and multi-degree-of-freedom systems made up of particles, rigid-objects in 2 and 3 special dimensions. Three approaches are used: the Newton-Euler and Lagrangian approach, both using minimal coordinates, and also a 'maximal coordinate' approach using differential algebraic equations (DAEs). The course emphasizes finding equations of motion, solving them analytically (if possible) and numerically; and graphical presentation of solutions, including animations.
outcome: The student will be able to locate the governing equations of motion for a variety of dynamic mechanical systems consisting of particles and rigid objects that might interact with various standard connections (e.g., strings, springs, hinges, rolling, surface sliding) and forces (e.g., gravity, friction, fluid drag)., The student will be able to solve the simple cases by hand, solve the more complex cases with numerical integration (Matlab), graphically represent the results, including animations., The student will be able to check the reasonableness of the results using extreme cases and Laws of Conservation (momentum, angular momentum and energy)., The student will be able to use principles of Lagrangian mechanics to develop the same governing equations as above for simple conservative systems., The student will be able to formulate, setup, numerically solve, and interpret the equations and solutions of a 3D rigid object rotating in space., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 or equivalent.

class: MAE 4760
class title: Foundations of Robotics
description: Robotics is interdisciplinary and draws inspiration from many different fields towards solving a variety of tasks in real-world environments using physical systems. This course is a challenging introduction to basic computational concepts used broadly in robotics. By the end of this course, students should have a fundamental understanding of how the different sub-fields of robotics such as kinematics, state-estimation, motion planning, and controls come together to develop intelligent behaviors in physical robotic systems. The mathematical basis of each area will be emphasized, and concepts will be motivated using common robotics applications. Students will be evaluated using a mixture of theoretical and programming exercises throughout the semester. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110, and the following or their equivalents: CS 2800, MATH 1920, MATH 2940.

class: MAE 4810
class title: Robot Perception
description: An introductory course to robot perception techniques for modeling and planning heterogeneous and dynamic sensor measurements, and for processing the sensor feedback in the context of robot motions and environments. Methods for intelligent sensor fusion and robot perception in motion will be covered in detail in this course. Topics in artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering will be discussed along with related algorithms inspired by neural networks, Bayesian networks, and information theory. Sensing problems and performance will be investigated in regard to benchmark problems, such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting, will be covered in-depth and demonstrated through applications drawn from environmental monitoring, sensing-and-pursuit games, surveillance, and human-robot interactions.
outcome: Students will be able to use methods for sensor fusion to inform robot perception., Students will be able to implement artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering along with neural networks, Bayesian algorithms, and information theory to identify robot states., Students will be able to analyze benchmark problems such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2112, MATH 2940, and MATH 4710 (or ENGRD 2700 or ENGRD 2720); or graduate standing in a technical field.

class: MAE 4900
class title: Individual and Group Projects in Mechanical Engineering
description: Individual or group study or project for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project. Students must first make individual arrangements with a faculty sponsor and then submit an enrollment form, available online at https://www.mae.cornell.edu/mae/programs/undergraduate-programs/undergraduate-forms. Once approved, students will receive an enrollment pin to enroll in MAE 4900.

class: MAE 4980
class title: Teaching Experience in Mechanical Engineering
description: Students serve as teaching assistants in Cornell Mechanical Engineering classes or in local middle school technology classes.

class: MAE 5065
class title: Introduction to Spaceflight Mechanics
description: Introduction to spacecraft orbit mechanics, attitude dynamics, and the design and implementation of spaceflight maneuvers for satellites, probes, and rockets. Topics in celestial mechanics include orbital elements, types &amp; uses of orbits, coordinate systems, Kepler's equation, the restricted three-body problem, interplanetary trajectories, the rocket equation and staging, Clohessy-Wiltshire equations and relative formation flight, drag and orbital decay, and propulsive maneuvers. Topics in attitude dynamics include kinematics, Euler's equations, stability of spinning spacecraft, attitude perturbations such as gravity-gradient and magnetic torques, equations of motion of rigid spacecraft with momentum actuators and thrusters, attitude maneuvers such as nutation control and reorientation, low-speed fluid behaviors, and elementary feedback control of linearized attitude and orbit dynamics. Principles of spacecraft propulsion technology and attitude-control technology are introduced along with the rocket equation and staging. The course includes discussions of current problems and trends in spacecraft operation and development.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the fundamentals of spaceflight mechanics and how high-level mission requirements drive the design of orbits and attitude for contemporary spacecraft., Students will be able to understand the application of Kepler's laws for orbital motion, how to propagate an orbit, and calculate parameters associated with mission operations, including launch, insertion, and interplanetary transfers., Students will be able to understand the application of Euler's equations for rigid-body motion to spacecraft dynamics, attitude representations, attitude kinematics, how to predict and model spacecraft attitude motions, and how to achieve desirable attitude-dynamics behaviors., Students will be able to simulate a spacecraft in orbit using state of the art tools and identify and characterize the astrodynamics capabilities of a preliminary spacecraft design., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2930, MATH 2940, and MAE 2030.

class: MAE 5250
class title: Computer-Aided Manufacture
description: Covers the fundamentals of computer-aided manufacture (CAM) and computer numerical control (CNC) programming. The course is a hands-on series on CAM and provides practical applications for the use of Gcode and solid modeling software, CNC mill and/or lathe setup, tool selection, and operation. May not be used to fulfill any ME requirement.
outcome: The student will be able to describe the role of machine tools in history and current industry., The student will be able to list and describe the capabilities and limitations of machine tool technology., The student will be able to perform CNC programming both manually and in AutoDesk Fusion 360., 

class: MAE 5270
class title: Design Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (DFMEA)
description: In industry, engineers are often tasked with the mitigation of technical and functional risks associated with the development and launch of new products. A Design Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (DFMEA) is a controlled process by which a product concept, a customer specification, and other system functional requirements are transformed into a fully validated (robust) product design whose product risks can be recorded, minimized, and communicated to the greater organization prior to product launch. This course will explore the realization of validated designs through the utilization of the DFMEA process.
outcome: Students will be able to better understand the role of design engineers as related to industry., Students will be able to understand Design Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (DFMEA) as it applied to design of mechanical systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: equivalent CAD-based design course plus 2.5 years of engineering mathematics, including probability and statistics.

class: MAE 5310
class title: Advanced Thermodynamics of Multiphase Systems
description: This course will provide a more advanced treatment of classical thermodynamics than is typically found in a first course on the subject. The emphasis will be on phase transitions of fluid systems. Topics include the following: stability of superheated liquids and supersaturated gases; second law limits of allowable fluid states; energetics and kinetics of nano-scale bubble formation in the bulk of a liquid and at a solid surface; transport equations for melting, solidification, bubble growth and droplet burning. Applications will include industrial considerations related to rapid evaporation relevant to vapor explosions, burning of fuel droplets, ink-jet printing, liquid natural gas spills, and nuclear reactor safety. Transport of two-phase flows will be summarized from a simplified perspective. 
outcome: Students will be able to identify the terminologies associated with the laws, postulates, corollaries and systems of thermodynamics., Students will be able to predict the thermodynamic and kinetic limits of superheat of a fluid with application to selected industrial problems., Students will be able to develop models for melting and freezing of fluids including problem formulation with boundary conditions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2210 and MAE 3240.

class: MAE 5340
class title: Innovative Product Design via Digital Manufacturing
description: This hands-on/project-based course instructs students on methods to identify product concepts for machine designs with commercial potential. It combines lectures and field/lab activities on the new product development cycle: iterative design based on ethnographic fieldwork, team brainstorming, prototyping, testing/consumer feedback, and limitations set by mass manufacturing. Students –coming from diverse backgrounds and industry experience, and some currently working in different companies -will be teamed together to develop the new products. They will be given a common design challenge, and after observing and engaging with real users, they will identify specific needs; then based on those needs each team will end up with a different problem definition and a different product. Industry advisers from real world companies will provide constant feedback throughout the semester.
outcome: Students will be able to experience the major impact of a human-centered design approach., Students will be able to understand the logic of the product development cycle in the context of both a startup company and an established firm., Students will be able to appreciate the limitations of early-stage prototypes and the importance of staged development into more realistic prototypes., Students will be able to identify product platforms for mechanical design with commercial potential., Students will be able to appreciate Intellectual Property in terms of design and utility., The student will be able to acquire familiarity with basic tools of design and manufacturing, such as CAD and digital manufacturing tools., 

class: MAE 5430
class title: Combustion Processes
description: Combustion is an interdisciplinary field that combines chemistry, fluid mechanics, thermodynamics and heat transfer. This course is an introduction to combustion science, beginning with a review of thermodynamics, its application to combustion system analysis, and concepts of chemical kinetics.  We will then discuss the nonequilibrium diffusive transport of heat, mass and momentum and introduce the general conservation equations for chemically reacting flows. The transport laws and governing equations are then applied to several flame configurations. Finally, the basic structure of premixed and non-premixed flames are analyzed, and practical applications of these principles in transportation, propulsion, power generation, and industrial processes are discussed.
outcome: Students will be able to identify basic flame structure in existing practical combustion systems (gas turbine engine, internal combustion engines, etc.)., Students will be able to identify regimes of subsonic and supersonic flame propagation in premixtures., Students will be able to compare and apply different models for predicting thermochemical data., Students will be able to distinguish reaction mechanisms corresponding to different fuels., Students will be able to calculate reaction rates., Students will be able to calculate analytically and numerically (using open-source software Cantera) the energy released during combustion and the thermodynamic state of the combustion products., 

class: MAE 5459
class title: Energy Seminar I
description: Energy Seminars will explore energy-related topics of emerging, contemporary and historical interest. An abbreviated list of subjects explored in the seminars includes: global energy resources, energy generation technologies (present and future), energy storage options, environmental impacts and climate change mitigation, energy policy, and energy delivery economics and systems. Seminar speakers will be distinguished practicing engineers and executives from industry and government as well as faculty members from several departments at Cornell, and other academic institutions. Students from any department in Engineering or the Physical Sciences should find these talks informative.

class: MAE 5540
class title: Propulsion of Spacecraft
description: This course provides the contextual and physical framework to understand and design space propulsion devices for orbiting spacecraft and satellite systems. An introduction to the basic principles of propulsion and performance metrics in the context of space missions are presented. Key physics underlying the operation of propulsion devices are covered. Specifically, the design and performance of ion engines, Hall thrusters, electrospray thrusters, and emerging propulsion concepts are covered.
outcome: Students will be conversant across the range of propulsion options for space missions., Students will be able to describe the physics underlying their operation and performance limits., Students will be able to use their knowledge of propulsion physics and mission context to create or evaluate new designs., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: undergraduate-level coursework in thermodynamics, electromagnetism, and orbital mechanics.

class: MAE 5650
class title: Biofluid Mechanics
description: For description and learning outcomes, see MAE 5650. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 and ENGRD 2202 or MAE 3230 or equivalents, or permission of instructor.

class: MAE 5700
class title: Finite Element Analysis for Mechanical and Aerospace Design
description: Introduction to linear finite element static analysis for discrete and distributed mechanical and aerospace structures. Prediction of load, deflection, stress, strain, and temperature distributions. Major emphasis on underlying mechanics and mathematical formulation. Introduction to computational aspects via educational and commercial software (such as MATLAB and ANSYS). Selected mechanical and aerospace applications in the areas of trusses, beams, frames, heat transfer and elasticity. A selection of advanced topics such as dynamic modal analysis, transient heat transfer, or design optimization techniques may also be covered, time permitting.
outcome: Students will be able to recall, identify, and analyze the mathematical and physical principles underlying the FEM as applied to solid mechanics, thermal analysis and select aspects of fluid mechanics., Students will be able to develop their own FEM computer programs, for mathematically simple but physically challenging problems, in MATLAB., Students will be able to compare FEM results obtained with MATLAB with those obtained from ANSYS. Analyze more complex problems (in solid mechanics or thermal analysis) using the commercial FEM code ANSYS., Students will be able to demonstrate the ability to design a component using FEM analysis (both MATLAB AND ANSYS)., Students will be able to make clear and effective technical presentations, both in terms of form as well as content, of his/her work and write clear technical reports describing his/her work., 

class: MAE 5730
class title: Intermediate Dynamics
description: The course emphasizes the classical dynamics of single- and multi-degree-of-freedom systems made up of particles, rigid-objects in 2 and 3 spatial dimensions. Three approaches are used: the Newton-Euler and Lagrangian approach, both using minimal coordinates, and also a 'maximal coordinate' approach using differential algebraic equations (DAEs). The course emphasizes finding equations of motion, solving them analytically (if possible) and numerically; and graphical presentation of solutions, including animations.
outcome: The student will be able to locate the governing equations of motion for a variety of dynamic mechanical systems consisting of particles and rigid objects that might interact with various standard connections (e.g., strings, springs, hinges, rolling, surface sliding) and forces (e.g., gravity, friction, fluid drag)., The student will be able to solve the simple cases by hand, solve the more complex cases with numerical integration (Matlab), graphically represent the results, including animations., The student will be able to check the reasonableness of the results using extreme cases and Laws of Conservation (momentum, angular momentum and energy)., The student will be able to use principles of Lagrangian mechanics to develop the same governing equations as above for simple conservative systems., The student will be able to formulate, setup, numerically solve, and interpret the equations and solutions of a 3D rigid object rotating in space., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 or equivalent.

class: MAE 5790
class title: Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos
description: Introduction to nonlinear dynamics, with applications to physics, engineering, biology, and chemistry. Emphasizes analytical methods, concrete examples, and geometric thinking. Topics include one-dimensional systems; bifurcations; phase plane; nonlinear oscillators; and Lorenz equations, chaos, strange attractors, fractals, iterated mappings, period doubling, renormalization.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high level of performance in a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MAE 5810
class title: Robot Perception
description: An introductory course to robot perception techniques for modeling and planning heterogeneous and dynamic sensor measurements, and for processing the sensor feedback in the context of robot motions and environments. Methods for intelligent sensor fusion and robot perception in motion will be covered in detail in this course. Topics in artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering will be discussed along with related algorithms inspired by neural networks, Bayesian networks, and information theory. Sensing problems and performance will be investigated in regard to benchmark problems, such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting, will be covered in-depth and demonstrated through applications drawn from environmental monitoring, sensing-and-pursuit games, surveillance, and human-robot interactions.
outcome: Students will be able to use methods for sensor fusion to inform robot perception., Students will be able to implement artificial vision, acoustic propagation, and filtering along with neural networks, Bayesian algorithms, and information theory to identify robot states., Students will be able to analyze benchmark problems such as coverage, target search, target tracking, and treasure hunting., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2112, MATH 2940, and MATH 4710 (or ENGRD 2700 or ENGRD 2720); or graduate standing in a technical field.

class: MAE 5910
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: enrollment in group-based project with strong system design component approved by course instructor.

class: MAE 5930
class title: Systems Engineering and Six Sigma for the Design and Operation of Reliable Systems
description: Develops skills in the design, operation and control of systems for reliable performance. Focuses on four key themes; risk analysis (with a particular emphasis on risk assessment and risk characterization), modeling system reliability (including the development of statistical models based on accelerated life testing), quality control techniques and the optimization of system design for reliability. Six Sigma Green or Blackbelt can be earned through activities associated with course. Students in distance-learning programs enroll in SYSEN 5100.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 5910, ENGRD 2700, or CEE 3040.

class: MAE 5940
class title: Professional Development for Master of Engineering in MAE
description: Covers tools needed to build skills for career development and the job search. Also covers a process to organize, complete and present the Master of Engineering Project.
outcome: Students will be able to describe career and job goals in writing and orally., Students will be able to understand how to start a project and plan for its successful completion., Students will be able to present work in a formal presentation and a poster., 

class: MAE 6010
class title: Foundations of Fluid Mechanics I
description: Foundations of fluid mechanics from an advanced viewpoint, including formulation of continuum fluid dynamics; kinematic descriptions of fluid flow, derivation of the Navier-Stokes equations and energy equation for compressible fluids; and sound waves, viscous flows, boundary layers, and potential flows.
outcome: Students will be able to identify important fluid properties and physical processes in fluid flows., Students will be able to formulate mathematical models for fluid flows., Students will be able to select methods of analysis and computation., Students will be able to develop solutions and interpret them in physical terms., Students will be able to explain what was learned in written and oral form., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 3230 or higher, in addition to basic knowledge in vector calculus, ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, and complex variable analysis.

class: MAE 6060
class title: Spacecraft Attitude Dynamics, Estimation, and Control
description: The focus is on spacecraft attitude dynamics and its application in core space-systems areas: mission design, operations, and autonomy. Also introduces the problem of attitude estimation and treats aspects of guidance, navigation, and control unique to the context of space mission design. Readings and lectures include examples based on flight data.
outcome: Students will be able to analyze and simulate problems in spacecraft dynamics, control, and estimation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940 and MAE 4730/MAE 5730, some experience with MATLAB is expected.

class: MAE 6110
class title: Foundations of Solid Mechanics I
description: An in-depth introduction to the fundamentals of kinematics of deformation, traction and stress, and balance of momentum. Constitutive theory for linear and nonlinear elastic bodies, including isotropic and orthotropic behaviors, restrictions from symmetry and strain energy, and length scale limitations stemming from a material's physical structure. Boundary conditions, requirements for well-posed problems, and uniqueness. Basic theorems and principles for elastostatics, with emphasis on virtual work, upper and lower bounds, and superposition.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: competence in MATLAB, C or Fortran.

class: MAE 6130
class title: Foundations and Frontiers of Engineered Living Materials
description: This course will provide foundational knowledge to work in the interdisciplinary field of engineered living materials.  Topics will include structure-funtion relationships in different organisms; culturing techniques; genetic engineering and sequencing techniques; mechanical, electrochemical, and optical characterization methods; and biological system modeling.
outcome: Students will be able to analyze literature in the engineered living materials field., Students will be able to demonstrate the ability to orally communicate technical concepts in their field of expertise to scientists and engineers from different fields., Students will be able to demonstrate knowledge of tools and techniques for attacking specific challenges in the engineered living materials field., Students will be able to identify research gaps and opportunities., 

class: MAE 6450
class title: Advanced Topics in Metal Additive Manufacturing
description: This course delves into three distinct categories of metal additive manufacturing processes, each governed by unique principles: solidification-based techniques, sintering-dependent methods, and solid-state bonding processes. Students will explore the intricacies of powder bed fusion and direct energy deposition, where solidification mechanisms play a pivotal role in controlling microstructure formation. The course will provide a comprehensive understanding of how factors such as heat transfer, cooling rates, and alloy composition influence solidification behavior in these processes. Additionally, students will examine indirect metal printing methods, including extrusion, stereolithography, and binder jetting, which rely on sintering to fuse metal powders together. Detailed discussions will cover the sintering process, its underlying mechanisms, and its impact on the final properties of printed parts. Furthermore, the course will delve into metal additive manufacturing processes based on solid-state bonding, such as cold spray and sheet lamination. Students will explore the principles of solid-state bonding, including diffusion bonding and mechanical interlocking, and understand how these processes are applied to join metal powders/sheets without melting. Throughout the course, major alloys commonly used in metal additive manufacturing, such as Ni-based alloys, titanium alloys, steels, and aluminum alloys, will be discussed. Common defects encountered in metal printing technologies, post-processing steps for defect removal, and in situ monitoring techniques for defect mitigation will also be covered, ensuring students gain a comprehensive understanding of quality assurance in metal AM.
outcome: Students will be able to learn the fundamentals of additive manufacturing (AM) of polymers, metals, and ceramics., Students will be able to understand the operating principles, capabilities, and limitations of state-of-the-art AM methods, including fused deposition modeling, photopolymerization, laser melting/sintering, and material/binder jetting., Students will be able to understand properties of AM parts., Students will be able to realize industrial applications of AM., 

class: MAE 6670
class title: Soft Tissue Biomechanics II: Viscoelasticity and Phasic Theory
description: Application of mechanics and materials principles to orthopaedic soft tissues. Mechanical properties of cartilage, tendon, and ligaments; applied viscoelasticity theory for cartilage, tendon, and ligament; cartilage, tendon, and ligament biology; tendon and ligament wound healing; osteoarthritis.
outcome: Students will be able to know and understand the function and physiology of orthopaedic soft tissues that lead to effective joint function., Students will be able to develop a basic understanding of viscoelasticity theory and its application to orthopaedic tissues., Students will be able to apply linear viscoelasticity, quasilinear viscoelasticity, and biphasic theory to tendon, ligament, cartilage, and fibrocartilage., Students will be able to understand the rationale for using these theories to characterize the mechanical behavior of orthopaedic tissues., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020.

class: MAE 6720
class title: Advanced Astrodynamics
description: A graduate level course in astrodynamics and trajectory design. Course topics include a brief review of the two body problem, impulsive transfers, and perturbations; orbit determination and one-way ranging; algebraic and symplectic mappings and surfaces of section; the circular and elliptical 3-body problem, invariant manifolds and 3-body orbit design; secular and resonant perturbations; finite and continuous thrust modeling and transfer design. The course will emphasize numerical methods and building deep understanding of modern approaches to orbital design problems. Familiarity with basic orbital mechanics (at the level of MAE 4060 or equivalent) and numerical integration of dynamical systems will be assumed.
outcome: Students will be able to understand the evolution of orbits of spacecraft and natural bodies in response to various forces., Students will be able to simulate and fit natural orbits and spacecraft trajectories using a variety of computational tools., Students will be able to understand the inner workings of modern orbit design and analysis tools., Students will be able to understand the dynamical behavior of planetary systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: advanced undergraduate course in dynamics.

class: MAE 6770
class title: Formal Methods for Robotics
description: How can we guarantee robots will never cause harm? How can we prove that complicated mechanical systems, controlled by computers and programmed by people, will always behave as expected under changing conditions and in a variety of uncertain environments? How do we formalize what such behaviors are? Guaranteeing safety, predictability and reliability of robots is crucial for the assimilation of such systems into society, be it at home or in the workplace. While every robotics researcher working with or on a robot is aware of safety issues, only recently the robotics community has begun looking at ways to either formally prove or grarantee by design different behavioral properties such as safety and correctness. This class will present recent results on the topic of formal methods for robotics and automation that combine and extend ideas from control theory, dynamical systems, automata theory, logic, model checking, synthesis, and hybrid systems.
outcome: The student will be able to define specifications using different formalisms such as temporal logics and sets., The student will be able to will explain different verification algorithms., The student will be able to explain the different approaches to control synthesis., The student will be able to present a state-of-the-art research paper in a way that conveys the main contribution of the paper., The student will be able to apply the tools learned in the class to their individually chosen project., 

class: MAE 6800
class title: Design and Control of Haptic Systems
description: Study of the design and control of haptic systems, which provide touch feedback to human users interacting with virtual environments and teleoperated robots. Focus is on device modeling (kinematics and dynamics), synthesis and analysis of control systems, design and implementation, and human interaction with haptic systems. Coursework includes homework/laboratory assignments, a research paper presentation, and a hands-on project. Directed toward graduate students in engineering and computer science. Prerequisites: dynamic systems, feedback controls, and MATLAB programming.
outcome: Students will be able to identify the primary mechanisms of human haptic sensing., Students will be able to describe and implement basic telemanipulation controllers., Students will be able to design psychophysical and perceptual tests., Students will be able to develop a new haptic device or application of a haptic device., Students will be able to read, evaluate, and critique research papers., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MAE 3260, MAE 3780, CS 1109, CS 1110, or equivalent(s). 

class: MAE 6900
class title: Special Investigations in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
description: The Master of Engineering Project adds real world, applied experience to an MEng Program. Projects are the centerpiece of the program, leveraging new and learned subject matter to highlight engineering skills in ways that mirror employment after school. Projects are done in a focus area, under an advisor's direction, usually a faculty member, but also corporate partners. Projects are applied, utilizing engineering tools to complete a a design, an apparatus, a process, or an analysis.
outcome: Students will be able to determine feasibility of design or concept; document design issues, challenges, and constraints., Students will be able to create detailed and appropriate plana; monitor and assess project progress as related to plan., Students will be able to use engineering tools (concepts, modeling, simulations, testing, evaluation) to determine accuracy or success of project., Students will be able to apply critical approach to work; how to seek and incorporate feedback; demonstrate sound decision making., Students will be able to show written and oral communication, both formally and informally: progress report, email, phone, online., Students will be able to demonstrate the use of weekly report, logging, creating a final report and/or
presentation., 

class: MAE 6910
class title: M.Eng. Independent Study
description: This course is designed to allow students to pursue individual learning or topics not covered by existing curriculum that relate to a focus area. Students are required to have a faculty advisor or supervisor for the course. Each course is individualized based on a plan of study negotiated between the student and faculty. Students work independently, and faculty provide guidance and supervision. An independent study must be approved by the Master of Engineering Director. A maximum of four credits will the allowed.

class: MAE 6949
class title: Seminar for M.S. and First-Year MAE Ph.D. Students
description: Mandatory course for all M.S. and first-year Ph.D. students in the Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. An ongoing orientation and mentoring seminar for M.S. and first-year Ph.D. students that includes research presentations by faculty and students as well as discussions and assignments on such topics as academic ethics, writing technical papers, and publishing.

class: MAE 6998
class title: Graduate Research Internship for International Students
description: Off-campus internship in which graduate students gain experience in mechanical and/or aerospace engineering.

class: MAE 7999
class title: Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Colloquium
description: MAE 7999 is a weekly seminar series featuring invited speakers both internal and external. Topics range the areas in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. The purpose of MAE 7999 is twofold: (a) to expose students to current research activities, challenges, and opportunities on the frontiers of Mechanical and Aerospace engineering, and (b) to improve student presentation skills by attending and critiquing presentations.
outcome: Students will be able to be exposed to current research areas., Students will be able to learn about current problem solving techniques., Students will be able to critique a formal research presentation., Students will be able to critique presentation methods., 

class: MAE 8900
class title: Research in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
description: Independent research in an area of mechanical and aerospace engineering under the guidance of a member of the faculty.

class: MATH 1011
class title: Academic Support for MATH 1110
description: Reviews material presented in MATH 1110 lectures, provides problem-solving techniques and tips as well as prelim review. Provides further instruction for students who need reinforcement. Not a substitute for attending MATH 1110 lectures or discussions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 1110.

class: MATH 1012
class title: Academic Support for MATH 1120
description: Reviews material presented in MATH 1120 lectures, provides problem-solving techniques and tips as well as prelim review. Provides further instruction for students who need reinforcement. Not a substitute for attending MATH 1120 lectures or discussions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 1120.

class: MATH 1021
class title: Academic Support for MATH 2210
description: Reviews material presented in MATH 2210 lectures, provides problem-solving techniques and tips as well as prelim review. Provides further instruction for students who need reinforcement. Not a substitute for attending MATH 2210 lectures or discussions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MATH 2210.

class: MATH 1101
class title: Calculus Preparation
description: Introduces topics in calculus: limits, rates of change, definition of and techniques for finding derivatives, relative and absolute extrema, and applications. The calculus content of the course is similar to 1/3 of the content covered in MATH 1106 and MATH 1110. In addition, the course includes a variety of topics of algebra, with emphasis on the development of linear, power, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions. Because of the strong emphasis on graphing, students will have a better understanding of asymptotic behavior of these functions.

class: MATH 1105
class title: Finite Mathematics for the Life and Social Sciences
description: Introduction to linear algebra, probability, and Markov chains that develops the parts of the theory most relevant for applications. Specific topics include equations of lines, the method of least squares, solutions of linear systems, matrices; basic concepts of probability, permutations, combinations, binomial distribution, mean and variance, and the normal approximation to the binomial distribution. Examples from biology and the social sciences are used.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: MATH 1110
class title: Calculus I
description: Topics include functions and graphs, limits and continuity, differentiation and integration of algebraic, trigonometric, inverse trig, logarithmic, and exponential functions; applications of differentiation, including graphing, max-min problems, tangent line approximation, implicit differentiation, and applications to the sciences; the mean value theorem; and antiderivatives, definite and indefinite integrals, the fundamental theorem of calculus, and the area under a curve.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: MATH 1120
class title: Calculus II
description: Focuses on integration: applications, including volumes and arc length; techniques of integration, approximate integration with error estimates, improper integrals, differential equations and their applications. Also covers infinite sequences and series: definition and tests for convergence, power series, Taylor series with remainder, and parametric equations.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110, excellent performance in MATH 1106, or equivalent AP credit.

class: MATH 1300
class title: Mathematical Explorations
description: For students who wish to experience how mathematical ideas naturally evolve. The course emphasizes ideas and imagination rather than techniques and calculations. Homework involves students in actively investigating mathematical ideas. Topics vary depending on the instructor. Some assessment through writing assignments.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: MATH 1710
class title: Statistical Theory and Application in the Real World
description: Introductory statistics course discussing techniques for analyzing data occurring in the real world and the mathematical and philosophical justification for these techniques. Topics include population and sample distributions, central limit theorem, statistical theories of point estimation, confidence intervals, testing hypotheses, the linear model, and the least squares estimator. The course concludes with a discussion of tests and estimates for regression and analysis of variance (if time permits). The computer is used to demonstrate some aspects of the theory, such as sampling distributions and the Central Limit Theorem. In the lab portion of the course, students learn and use computer-based methods for implementing the statistical methodology presented in the lectures.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: MATH 1910
class title: Calculus for Engineers
description: Essentially a second course in calculus. Topics include techniques of integration, finding areas and volumes by integration, exponential growth, partial fractions, infinite sequences and series, tests of convergence, and power series.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: MATH 1920
class title: Multivariable Calculus for Engineers
description: Introduction to multivariable calculus. Topics include partial derivatives, double and triple integrals, line and surface integrals, vector fields, Green's theorem, Stokes' theorem, and the divergence theorem.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910 or equivalent AP credit.

class: MATH 2210
class title: Linear Algebra
description: Topics include vector algebra, linear transformations, matrices, determinants, orthogonality, eigenvalues, and eigenvectors. Applications are made to linear differential or difference equations. The lectures introduce students to formal proofs. Students are required to produce some proofs in their homework and on exams.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110-MATH 1120 with high performance, equivalent AP credit, or permission of department.

class: MATH 2220
class title: Multivariable Calculus
description: Differential and integral calculus of functions in several variables, line and surface integrals as well as the theorems of Green, Stokes, and Gauss.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210.

class: MATH 2230
class title: Theoretical Linear Algebra and Calculus
description: Topics include vectors, matrices, and linear transformations; differential calculus of functions of several variables; inverse and implicit function theorems; quadratic forms, extrema, and manifolds; multiple and iterated integrals.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110-MATH 1120 with a grade of A- or better, equivalent AP credit, or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 2310
class title: Linear Algebra for Data Science
description: An introduction to linear algebra for students interested in applications to data science. The course diverges from traditional linear algebra courses by emphasizing data science applications while teaching similar concepts. Key topics include matrices as data tables, high-dimensional datasets, singular value decomposition for data compression, and linear transformations in computer graphics.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1106, MATH 1110, or equivalent AP credit.

class: MATH 2930
class title: Differential Equations for Engineers
description: Introduction to ordinary and partial differential equations. Topics include: first-order equations (separable, linear, homogeneous, exact); mathematical modeling (e.g., population growth, terminal velocity); qualitative methods (slope fields, phase plots, equilibria, and stability); numerical methods; second-order equations (method of undetermined coefficients, application to oscillations and resonance, boundary-value problems and eigenvalues); and Fourier series. A substantial part of this course involves partial differential equations, such as the heat equation, the wave equation, and Laplace's equation. (This part must be present in any outside course being considered for transfer credit to Cornell as a substitute for MATH 2930.)
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920.

class: MATH 2940
class title: Linear Algebra for Engineers
description: Linear algebra and its applications. Topics include: matrices, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, orthogonality and inner product spaces; applications include brief introductions to difference equations, Markov chains, and systems of linear ordinary differential equations. May include computer use in solving problems.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1920.

class: MATH 3040
class title: Prove It!
description: In mathematics, the methodology of proof provides a central tool for confirming the validity of mathematical assertions, functioning much as the experimental method does in the physical sciences. In this course, students learn various methods of mathematical proof, starting with basic techniques in propositional and predicate calculus and in set theory and combinatorics, and then moving to applications and illustrations of these via topics in one or more of the three main pillars of mathematics: algebra, analysis, and geometry. Since cogent communication of mathematical ideas is important in the presentation of proofs, the course emphasizes clear, concise exposition.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 3110
class title: Introduction to Analysis
description: Provides a transition from calculus to real analysis. Topics include rigorous treatment of fundamental concepts in calculus: including limits and convergence of sequences and series, compact sets; continuity, uniform continuity and differentiability of functions. Emphasis is placed upon understanding and constructing mathematical proofs.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 3210
class title: Manifolds and Differential Forms
description: A manifold is a type of subset of Euclidean space that has a well-defined tangent space at every point. Such a set is amenable to the methods of multivariable calculus. After a review of some relevant calculus, this course investigates manifolds and the structures that they are endowed with, such as tangent vectors, boundaries, orientations, and differential forms. The notion of a differential form encompasses such ideas as area forms and volume forms, the work exerted by a force, the flow of a fluid, and the curvature of a surface, space, or hyperspace. The course re-examines the integral theorems of vector calculus (Green, Gauss, and Stokes) in the light of differential forms and applies them to problems in partial differential equations, topology, fluid mechanics, and electromagnetism.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 3270
class title: Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations
description: A one-semester introduction to the theory and techniques of ordinary differential equations. Topics may include first-order and second-order differential equations, systems of linear differential equations, initial-value and two-point boundary-value problems, Sturm-Liouville theory, Sturm oscillation and comparison theory, the basic existence and uniqueness theorems, series solutions, special functions, and Laplace transforms. Applications from science and engineering may also be included at the instructor's discretion.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 3320
class title: Introduction to Number Theory
description: An introductory course on number theory, the branch of algebra that studies the deeper properties of integers and their generalizations. Usually includes most of the following topics: the Euclidean algorithm, continued fractions, Pythagorean triples, Diophantine equations such as Pell's equation, congruences, quadratic reciprocity, binary quadratic forms, Gaussian integers, and factorization in quadratic number fields. May include a brief introduction to Fermat's Last Theorem.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 3610
class title: Mathematical Modeling
description: Introduction to the theory and practice of mathematical modeling. This course compares and contrasts different types of mathematical models (discrete vs. continuous, deterministic vs. stochastic), focusing on advantages, disadvantages and limits of applicability for each approach. Case-study format covers a variety of application areas including economics, physics, sociology, traffic engineering, urban planning, robotics, and resource management. Students learn how to implement mathematical models on the computer and how to interpret/describe the results of their computational experiments.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110-MATH 1120 or equivalent.

class: MATH 3840
class title: Introduction to Set Theory
description: This will be a course on standard set theory (first developed by Ernst Zermelo early in the 20th century): the basic concepts of sethood and membership, operations on sets, functions as sets, the set-theoretic construction of the Natural Numbers, the Integers, the Rational and Real numbers; time permitting, some discussion of cardinality.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: MATH 4130
class title: Honors Introduction to Analysis I
description: Introduction to the rigorous theory underlying calculus, covering the real number system and functions of one variable. Based entirely on proofs. The student is expected to know how to read and, to some extent, construct proofs before taking this course. Topics typically include construction of the real number system, properties of the real number system, continuous functions, differential and integral calculus of functions of one variable, sequences and series of functions.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high level of performance in a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 4210
class title: Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos
description: Introduction to nonlinear dynamics, with applications to physics, engineering, biology, and chemistry. Emphasizes analytical methods, concrete examples, and geometric thinking. Topics include one-dimensional systems; bifurcations; phase plane; nonlinear oscillators; and Lorenz equations, chaos, strange attractors, fractals, iterated mappings, period doubling, renormalization.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high level of performance in a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 4220
class title: Applied Complex Analysis
description: Covers complex variables, Fourier transforms, Laplace transforms and applications to partial differential equations. Additional topics may include an introduction to generalized functions.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 4250
class title: Numerical Analysis and Differential Equations
description: Introduction to the fundamentals of numerical analysis: error analysis, approximation, interpolation, numerical integration. In the second half of the course, the above are used to build approximate solvers for ordinary and partial differential equations. Strong emphasis is placed on understanding the advantages, disadvantages, and limits of applicability for all the covered techniques. Computer programming is required to test the theoretical concepts throughout the course.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230-MATH 2240, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940 or equivalent and one additional mathematics course numbered 3000 or above.

class: MATH 4310
class title: Linear Algebra
description: Introduction to linear algebra, including the study of vector spaces, linear transformations, matrices, and systems of linear equations. Additional topics are quadratic forms and inner product spaces, canonical forms for various classes of matrices and linear transformations.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4330
class title: Honors Linear Algebra
description: Honors version of a course in advanced linear algebra, which treats the subject from an abstract and axiomatic viewpoint. Topics include vector spaces, linear transformations, polynomials, determinants, tensor and wedge products, canonical forms, inner product spaces, and bilinear forms. Emphasis is on understanding the theory of linear algebra; homework and exams include at least as many proofs as computational problems.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high level of performance in MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4370
class title: Computational Algebra
description: Introduction to algebraic geometry and computational algebra. In this course, students learn how to compute a Gröbner basis for polynomials in many variables. Covers the following applications: solving systems of polynomial equations in many variables, solving diophantine equations in many variables, 3-colorable graphs, and integer programming. Such applications arise, for example, in computer science, engineering, economics, and physics.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4410
class title: Introduction to Combinatorics I
description: Combinatorics is the study of discrete structures that arise in a variety of areas, particularly in other areas of mathematics, computer science, and many areas of application. Central concerns are often to count objects having a particular property (e.g., trees) or to prove that certain structures exist (e.g., matchings of all vertices in a graph). The first semester of this sequence covers basic questions in graph theory, including extremal graph theory (how large must a graph be before one is guaranteed to have a certain subgraph) and Ramsey theory (which shows that large objects are forced to have structure). Variations on matching theory are discussed, including theorems of Dilworth, Hall, König, and Birkhoff, and an introduction to network flow theory. Methods of enumeration (inclusion/exclusion, Möbius inversion, and generating functions) are introduced and applied to the problems of counting permutations, partitions, and triangulations.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4530
class title: Introduction to Topology
description: Topology may be described briefly as qualitative geometry. This course begins with basic point-set topology, including connectedness, compactness, and metric spaces. Later topics may include the classification of surfaces (such as the Klein bottle and Möbius band), elementary knot theory, or the fundamental group and covering spaces.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4710
class title: Basic Probability
description: Introduction to probability theory, which prepares the student to take MATH 4720. The course begins with basics: combinatorial probability, mean and variance, independence, conditional probability, and Bayes formula. Density and distribution functions and their properties are introduced. The law of large numbers and the central limit theorem are stated and their implications for statistics are discussed.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110-MATH 1120, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4810
class title: Mathematical Logic
description: First course in mathematical logic providing precise definitions of the language of mathematics and the notion of proof (propositional and predicate logic). The completeness theorem says that we have all the rules of proof we could ever have. The Gödel incompleteness theorem says that they are not enough to decide all statements even about arithmetic. The compactness theorem exploits the finiteness of proofs to show that theories have unintended (nonstandard) models. Possible additional topics: the mathematical definition of an algorithm and the existence of noncomputable functions; the basics of set theory to cardinality and the uncountability of the real numbers.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 4900
class title: Supervised Research
description: An independent research course by arrangement with an individual professor.  The goal is for the student to perform an independent investigation into a specific mathematical question.  The student and professor will set expectations and grading policies at the beginning of the term.

class: MATH 4901
class title: Supervised Reading
description: An independent reading course by arrangement with an individual professor. The goal is for the student to master a body of mathematics outside the normal curriculum. The student and professor will set expectations and grading policies at the beginning of the term.

class: MATH 4980
class title: Special Study for Mathematics Teaching
description: Examines principles underlying the content of the secondary school mathematics curriculum, including connections with the history of mathematics, technology, and mathematics education research. One credit is awarded for attending two Saturday workshops (see math.cornell.edu/math-5080) and writing a paper. Other credit options are available for students completing additional work, such as tutoring at a local middle school or completing a research paper or project.

class: MATH 4997
class title: Practical Training in Mathematics
description: This independent study course offers math majors (i.e., undergraduates whose applications to affiliate with the math major have been approved) an opportunity to reflect on concepts from mathematics as they were encountered and applied in a recent internship. Students write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of the mathematics major.

class: MATH 5080
class title: Special Study for Teachers
description: Examines principles underlying the content of the secondary school mathematics curriculum, including connections with the history of mathematics, technology, and mathematics education research.

class: MATH 5220
class title: Applied Complex Analysis
description: Covers complex variables, Fourier transforms, Laplace transforms and applications to partial differential equations. Additional topics may include an introduction to generalized functions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a semester of linear algebra (MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940) and a semester of multivariable calculus (MATH 2220, MATH 2240, or MATH 1920), or equivalent.

class: MATH 5250
class title: Numerical Analysis and Differential Equations
description: Introduction to the fundamentals of numerical analysis: error analysis, approximation, interpolation, numerical integration. In the second half of the course, the above are used to build approximate solvers for ordinary and partial differential equations. Strong emphasis is placed on understanding the advantages, disadvantages, and limits of applicability for all the covered techniques.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230-MATH 2240, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940 or equivalent, and one additional mathematics course numbered 3000 or above.

class: MATH 5410
class title: Introduction to Combinatorics I
description: Combinatorics is the study of discrete structures that arise in a variety of areas, particularly in other areas of mathematics, computer science, and many areas of application. Central concerns are often to count objects having a particular property (e.g., trees) or to prove that certain structures exist (e.g., matchings of all vertices in a graph). The first semester of this sequence covers basic questions in graph theory, including extremal graph theory (how large must a graph be before one is guaranteed to have a certain subgraph) and Ramsey theory (which shows that large objects are forced to have structure). Variations on matching theory are discussed, including theorems of Dilworth, Hall, König, and Birkhoff, and an introduction to network flow theory. Methods of enumeration (inclusion/exclusion, Möbius inversion, and generating functions) are introduced and applied to the problems of counting permutations, partitions, and triangulations.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, or MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: MATH 6110
class title: Real Analysis
description: MATH 6110-MATH 6120 are the core analysis courses in the mathematics graduate program. MATH 6110 covers abstract measure and integration theory, and related topics such as the Lebesgue differentiation theorem, the Radon-Nikodym theorem, the Hardy-Littlewood maximal function, the Brunn-Minkowski inequality, rectifiable curves and the isoperimetric inequality, Hausdorff dimension and Cantor sets, and an introduction to ergodic theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: strong performance in an undergraduate analysis course at the level of MATH 4140, or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 6210
class title: Measure Theory and Lebesgue Integration
description: Covers measure theory, integration, and Lp spaces.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate analysis and linear algebra at the level of MATH 4130 and MATH 4310.

class: MATH 6230
class title: Differential Games and Optimal Control
description: This course is a self-contained introduction to the modern theory of optimal control and differential games. Dynamic programming uses Hamilton-Jacobi partial differential equations (PDEs) to encode the optimal behavior in cooperative and adversarial sequential decision making problems. The same PDEs have an alternative interpretation in the context of front propagation problems. We show how both interpretations are useful in constructing efficient numerical methods. We also consider a wide range of applications, including robotics, computational geometry, path-planning, computer vision, photolithography, economics, seismic imaging, ecology, financial engineering, crowd dynamics, and aircraft collision avoidance. Assumes no prior knowledge of non-linear PDEs or numerical analysis.

class: MATH 6260
class title: Dynamical Systems
description: Topics include existence and uniqueness theorems for ODEs; Poincaré-Bendixon theorem and global properties of two dimensional flows; limit sets, nonwandering sets, chain recurrence, pseudo-orbits and structural stability; linearization at equilibrium points: stable manifold theorem and the Hartman-Grobman theorem; and generic properties: transversality theorem and the Kupka-Smale theorem. Examples include expanding maps and Anosov diffeomorphisms; hyperbolicity: the horseshoe and the Birkhoff-Smale theorem on transversal homoclinic orbits; rotation numbers; Herman's theorem; and characterization of structurally stable systems.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4130-MATH 4140, or the equivalent. Exposure to topology (e.g., MATH 4530) will be helpful.

class: MATH 6310
class title: Algebra
description: MATH 6310-MATH 6320 are the core algebra courses in the mathematics graduate program. MATH 6310 covers group theory, especially finite groups; rings and modules; ideal theory in commutative rings; arithmetic and factorization in principal ideal domains and unique factorization domains; introduction to field theory; tensor products and multilinear algebra. (Optional topic: introduction to affine algebraic geometry.)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: strong performance in an undergraduate abstract algebra course at the level of MATH 4340, or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 6390
class title: Lie Groups and Lie Algebras
description: Lie groups, Lie algebras, and their representations play an important role in much of mathematics, particularly in number theory, mathematical physics, and topology. This is an introductory course, meant to be useful for more advanced topics and applications. The relationship between Lie groups and Lie algebras will be highlighted throughout the course. A different viewpoint is that of algebraic groups. We will endeavor to discuss this along with the C∞ viewpoint.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic knowledge of algebra and linear algebra at the honors level (e.g., MATH 4330-MATH 4340).

class: MATH 6520
class title: Differentiable Manifolds
description: MATH 6510-MATH 6520 are the core topology courses in the mathematics graduate program. This course is an introduction to geometry and topology from a differentiable viewpoint, suitable for beginning graduate students. The objects of study are manifolds and differentiable maps. The collection of all tangent vectors to a manifold forms the tangent bundle, and a section of the tangent bundle is a vector field. Alternatively, vector fields can be viewed as first-order differential operators. We will study flows of vector fields and prove the Frobenius integrability theorem. We will examine the tensor calculus and the exterior differential calculus and prove Stokes' theorem. If time permits, de Rham cohomology, Morse theory, or other optional topics will be covered.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: strong performance in analysis (e.g., MATH 4130 and/or MATH 4140), linear algebra (e.g., MATH 4310), and point-set topology (e.g., MATH 4530), or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 6710
class title: Probability Theory I
description: Measure theory, independence, distribution of sums of iid random variables, laws of large numbers, and central limit theorem. Other topics as time permits.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of Lebesgue integration theory, at least on real line. Students can learn this material by taking MATH 4130-MATH 4140 or MATH 6210.

class: MATH 6740
class title: Mathematical Statistics II
description: Focuses on the foundations of statistical inference, with an emphasis on asymptotic methods and the minimax optimality criterion. In the first part, the solution of the classical problem of justifying Fisher's information bound in regular statistical models will be presented. This solution will be obtained applying the concepts of contiguity, local asymptotic normality and asymptotic minimaxity. The second part will be devoted to nonparametric estimation, taking a Gaussian regression model as a paradigmatic example. Key topics are kernel estimation and local polynomial approximation, optimal rates of convergence at a point and in global norms, and adaptive estimation. Optional topics may include irregular statistical models, estimation of functionals and nonparametric hypothesis testing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 6710 (measure theoretic probability) and STSCI 6730/MATH 6730, or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 6870
class title: Set Theory
description: First course in axiomatic set theory at the level of the book by Kunen.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: metric topology and measure theory (e.g., MATH 4130-MATH 4140 or MATH 6210) and a course in first-order logic (e.g., MATH 3840/PHIL 3300, MATH 4810/PHIL 4310, or MATH 6810), or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 7110
class title: Topics in Analysis
description: Selection of advanced topics from analysis. Course content varies.

class: MATH 7290
class title: Seminar on Scientific Computing and Numerics
description: Talks on various methods in scientific computing, the analysis of their convergence properties and computational efficiency, and their adaptation to specific applications.

class: MATH 7510
class title: Berstein Seminar in Topology
description: A seminar on an advanced topic in topology or a related subject. Content varies. The format is usually that the participants take turns to present.

class: MATH 7670
class title: Topics in Algebraic Geometry
description: Selection of topics from algebraic geometry. Content varies.
 

class: MATH 7710
class title: Topics in Probability Theory
description: Selection of advanced topics from probability theory. Content varies.

class: MATH 7740
class title: Statistical Learning Theory
description: Learning theory has become an important topic in modern statistics. This course gives an overview of various topics in classification, starting with Stone's (1977) stunning result that there are classifiers that are universally consistent. Other topics include classification, plug-in methods (k-nearest neighbors), reject option, empirical risk minimization, Vapnik-Chervonenkis theory, fast rates via Mammen and Tsybakov's margin condition, convex majorizing loss functions, RKHS methods, support vector machines, lasso type estimators, low-rank multivariate response regression, random matrix theory, topic models, latent factor models, and interpolation methods in high dimensional statistics.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic mathematical statistics (STSCI 6730/MATH 6730 or equivalent) and measure theoretic probability (MATH 6710), or permission of instructor.

class: MATH 7900
class title: Supervised Reading and Research
description: Supervised research for the doctoral dissertation.

class: MEDVL 1101
class title: FWS: Aspects of Medieval Culture
description: Topics and reading lists vary from section to section, but all will in some way address the subject of medieval culture. Consult the John S. Knight Institute Current Courses webpage to access current year offerings, instructors and section descriptions.

class: MEDVL 2083
class title: A Land to Call Our Own: De-Colonizing Medieval Europe
description: Colonial projects have a bad reputation; no one in their right mind would choose to identify as a colonizer, much less a colonialist. This was not always the case. In the 1800s, colonialism was the height of civilized accomplishment; everyone wanted in on it. In this course, we shift our gaze farther back in time to examine the thoughts and practices of people in medieval Europe. We delve into questions of function and type (is there a difference between colonization and colonialism?), of perspective and bias (does it matter how recent a colony is?), of social, cultural, regional, and temporal variation. By highlighting the non-self-evidence of truths we hold, the medieval past can help us appreciate why we cherish them nonetheless – or prompt us to re-evaluate them.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: MEDVL 2170
class title: Early Modern Iberian Survey
description: This course explores major texts and themes of the Hispanic tradition from the 11th to the 17th centuries. We will examine general questions on literary analysis and the relationship between literature and history around certain events, such as medieval multicultural Iberia, the creation of the Spanish Inquisition in the 15th century and the expulsion of the Jews in 1492; the encounter between the Old and the New Worlds; the 'opposition' of high and low in popular culture, and of the secular and the sacred in poetry and prose. Readings may be drawn from medieval short stories and miracle collections; chivalric romances, Columbus, Lazarillo de Tormes, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Calderón, and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095 , or CASE Q++.

class: MEDVL 2627
class title: Introduction to Islam
description: This course is an introduction to the study of Islam and Islamic history. Organised historically, the lecture series will begin with the career of the Prophet Muhammad, before charting the course of the Islamic Conquests, the establishment, zenith and collapse of various Islamic Empires, ending with European colonialism. Along the way, this geopolitical and historical overview will provide a backdrop to our exploration of changes and developments in Islamic thought and practice. In particular, we will focus on the emergence of the Sunni-Shi'i conflict, the rise of Sufism and Salafism, as well as how scholars across time and space thought and wrote about questions of ideal Islamic governance, the religious authority of the caliph, women's role in society and public space, slavery, the ethics of living under non-Muslim rule and the place of non-Muslims in Islamic society.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: MEDVL 3110
class title: Old English
description: English has a recorded history longer and more variable than any other language, including poetry and prose as skillful as writings in any period. While learning the language (especially in the first half of the course) we will investigate writings that exploit the language's powers and complexities from the earliest pieces into "early Middle English," when the language and its literary traditions disintegrated and began being reinvented at the Norman Conquest. We will also sample (in translation) Latin, Old Saxon, and Old Norse materials that fed the multilingual and multicultural world in which early English developed.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MEDVL 3315
class title: Old Norse I
description: Old Norse is a collective term for the earliest North Germanic literary languages: Old Icelandic, Old Norwegian, Old Danish, and Old Swedish. The richly documented Old Icelandic is the center of attention, and the purpose is twofold: the students gain knowledge of an ancient North Germanic language, important from a linguistic point of view, and gain access to the medieval Icelandic (and Scandinavian) literature. The structure of Old Norse (Old Icelandic), phonology, and morphology, with reading of selections from the Prose-Edda, a 13th-century narrative based on the Eddaic poetry. 

class: MEDVL 3539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: MEDVL 3750
class title: Introduction to Dendrochronology
description: Introduction and training in dendrochronology (tree-ring dating) and its applications in archaeology, art history, climate and environment through lab work and participation in ongoing research projects using ancient to modern wood samples from around the world. Supervised reading and laboratory/project work. Possibilities exists for summer fieldwork in the Mediterranean, Mexico, and New York State.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: MEDVL 3787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MEDVL 3850
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MEDVL 4002
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: MEDVL 6020
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: MEDVL 6110
class title: Old English
description: English has a recorded history longer and more variable than any other language, including poetry and prose as skillful as writings in any period. While learning the language (especially in the first half of the course) we will investigate writings that exploit the language's powers and complexities from the earliest pieces into "early Middle English," when the language and its literary traditions disintegrated and began being reinvented at the Norman Conquest. We will also sample (in translation) Latin, Old Saxon, and Old Norse materials that fed the multilingual and multicultural world in which early English developed.

class: MEDVL 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: MEDVL 6787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.

class: MEDVL 6850
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.

class: MEDVL 7777
class title: Medieval Studies Proseminar
description: This course is designed to introduce graduate students to the study of the Middle Ages, with special attention to theory and methodology. Seminars will be led by Medieval Studies Program faculty who represent a broad range of disciplines, time periods, languages, and geographical areas.

class: MEDVL 8010
class title: Directed Study - Individual
description: This course gives students the opportunity to work with a selected instructor to pursue special interests or research not treated in regularly scheduled courses. After getting permission of the instructor, students should contact the department to request access to an instructor's section. Enrolled students are required to provide the department with a course description and/or syllabus along with the instructor's approval by the end of the first week of classes.

class: MEDVL 8020
class title: Directed Study - Group
description: This course should be used for an independent study in which a small group of students works with one member of the graduate faculty. After getting permission of the instructor, students should contact the department to request access to an instructor's section. Enrolled students are required to provide the department with a course description and/or syllabus along with the instructor's approval by the end of the first week of classes.

class: MGMT 5010
class title: Data Modeling
description: Data Modeling is an exploration of approaches to quantitative decision making that allow for the integration of data from multiple sources and formats effectively creating a relational model with which to transparently display tabular data using pivot tables and charts.  Leveraging Microsoft Excel and Microsoft Power BI as a business analytics tools, the course will focus on using applied cases requiring various financial and other models. Emphasis will be placed on design that enhances decision making to improve business outcomes using descriptive, predictive and prescriptive modeling.

class: MGMT 5225
class title: Systems and Analytics
description: An investigation of the systems and software that capture and store economic information, and of the tools and techniques that support a robust use of that data for the benefit of individual enterprises and greater society.  Topics include "Big Data", Data Visualization, Optimization Tools, and Support Systems and Databases.  Modules on emergent systems, including Blockchain and AI are also engaged.

class: MGMT 5240
class title: Macroeconomic Theory
description: The course introduces the basic tools of economic policies and the key issues of modern economies. The course provides the necessary knowledge to analyze the basic goals of macroeconomic policy, namely low unemployment, stable inflation, financial stability, and stable and strong economic growth.  Topics covered include, among others, economic growth, expansions and recessions, monetary and fiscal policies, GDP, inflation, unemployment, the public debt, interest rates, the trade deficit, and global markets. Although focusing on the U.S.— the world's largest national economy—and paying special attention to its institutions and problems, the course will emphasize the global context in which it functions by periodically shifting attention to other economies around the world. Globalization-related issues such as international financial markets and global crises will be given special attention.

class: MGMT 5245
class title: Managerial Economics
description: The course introduces the basic tools for optimal pricing decisions by firms and the key issues of modern industries. It covers the pricing behavior of firms operating under perfect competition, monopoly, monopolistic competition, and oligopoly, and examines the challenges faced at the industry level as well as at the individual firm level. The goal is to understand the way firms set their production plans while operating in a global economic environment challenged by complicated phenomena.

class: MGMT 5640
class title: Entrepreneurship
description: The course provides a hand-on experience for learning the key philosophies and tactics of entrepreneurial activity and the entrepreneurial mindset. This includes the development of a viable business concept, meaningful customer discovery, the evaluation and planning of the start-up businesses, marketplace analysis, financing, and operations. The course utilizes lectures and the directed readings. The goal is a meaningful understanding of how to start a new business venture, achieved by building and communicating the framework for a viable business.

class: MGMT 5680
class title: Management Communication
description: This course is designed to improve your communication skills in the context of practical business applications—both business writing and oral presentations. We start with a strategic perspective on business communications before digging down into the elements that make your communications clear, concise, efficient, and effective. You will receive comprehensive feedback to improve the engagement, clarity, flow, and content of your business communications. You will also develop confidence in your ability to communicate.  

class: MGMT 5700
class title: Leadership
description: The theme of the course is to explore some the key principles of effective leadership in today's world. This will be done through 1.) Exploring historical and contemporary theories and models of leadership 2.) Developing self-awareness of leadership strengths and weaknesses through the use of behavioral instruments and group exercises and 3.) Developing decision-making and change management skills. 

class: MGMT 6000
class title: Practicum-Career Planning
description: The Career Practicum consists primarily of a series of career preparation events during the Fall academic term.  Each event is focused on a different aspect of career readiness.  Attendance at each event, subsequent reflection pieces, and other career related deliverables are all elements of the practicum.

class: MGMT 6220
class title: Marketing Strategy
description: This course will help you build and defend a great business. A strong business leader has to make smart, strategic marketing decisions, create and present a plan to get people on board, and then execute. You will learn about all of these steps in the course, as we review a range of topics including marketing fundamentals, new business strategy, established business strategy, brand portfolio strategy, and more. In doing so, we will build on the core marketing course and other marketing classes, in addition to introducing new concepts. The material for this course will help you analyze and understand businesses, develop and gain support for your marketing strategies and ultimately deliver strong results. 

class: MGMT 6820
class title: Negotiations
description: We negotiate every day with prospective employers, teammates, roommates, landlords, service providers, and many others. What prices we want to pay, how much we want to be paid, how assignments will be divided and credit allocated… all of these are negotiations. Yet while we negotiate routinely, many of us know very little about the strategy and psychology of effective negotiations. Why do we sometimes get our way while other times we walk away feeling frustrated by our inability to achieve the agreement we desire? Negotiation is the art and science of securing an agreement between two or more interdependent parties. A person without a developed understanding of the social psychology and economics of effective negotiations cannot be an effective leader. We will discuss theories and principles to guide our negotiations (the science), and students will develop and sharpen their bargaining skills by actually negotiating with other students in experiential exercises (the art). Further, given that negotiations occur in so many aspects of life, your experience in this course should not only develop your professional skills but also facilitate your effectiveness in other life domains. The learning method is experiential. The course introduces a real-world toolkit for a strategic approach from pre-negotiation planning to post-negotiation evaluation. In this course, you have the opportunity to develop your negotiating skills experientially and to gain insight into what works, what does not, and why.

class: MILS 1101
class title: Introduction to the Army
description: This course focuses on introduction to the Army and basic Soldier skills. It introduces students to the Army and the Profession of Arms. Students will examine the Army Profession and what it means to be a professional in the U.S. Army. The overall focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of the Army Leadership Requirements Model while gaining a complete understanding of the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the student. Students also begin learning map reading and land navigation. Students will have initial classes on fieldcraft, first aid, individual/team movement techniques that will include a monthly lab facilitated by MS III Cadets and supervised by MS IV's and cadre. The lab is not a requirement for students who do not enroll in ROTC.

class: MILS 1111
class title: Leadership Laboratory I
description: MILS I cadets meet for eight hours each month to learn a variety of military skills including rappelling, first aid, drill and ceremonies, weapons familiarization, physical fitness training, and small group leadership.

class: MILS 2201
class title: Leadership and Ethics
description: Focuses on leadership and ethics. The course adds depth to the student's knowledge of the different leadership styles. Students will conduct a leadership analysis of famous leaders and self-assessment of their own leadership style. The Army Profession is also stressed through understanding values, ethics and how to apply both to different situations they may encounter as a leader. Army Values and Ethics and their relationship to the Law of Land Warfare and philosophy of military service are also stressed. Troop Leading Procedures (TLPs) are introduced through case studies and roleplaying exercises. 

class: MILS 2211
class title: Leadership Laboratory II
description: Cadets meet for eight hours each month as members of the cadet organization to participate in practical leadership exercises. Types of practical activities include rifle marksmanship, orienteering, drill and ceremonies, signal communications, physical fitness training, first aid, tactics, field exercises, and small group leadership.

class: MILS 3301
class title: Training Management and the Warfighting Functions
description: MSL 3301 focuses on training management and the warfighting functions. It is an academically challenging course where you will study, practice, and apply the fundamentals of Training Management and how the Army operates through the Warfighting functions. At the conclusion of this course, you will be capable of planning, preparing, and executing training for a squad conducting small unit tactics.

class: MILS 3311
class title: Leadership Laboratory III
description: Cadets meet for eight hours each month to prepare for a five-week summer camp that follows their junior year. Emphasis is placed on the development of individual practical and leadership skills. Cadets rotate through leadership positions to practice applying decision-making skills in a myriad of situations.

class: MILS 4400
class title: Special Problems for Advanced Undergraduates
description: Individual investigation, research, studies, or surveys of selected problems that allow contracted ROTC Cadets to design a course of study to investigate selected topics in military science more completely.

class: MILS 4401
class title: The Army Officer
description: MSL 4401 Focuses on development of the Army Officer. It is an academically challenging course where you will develop knowledge, skills, and abilities to plan, resource, and assess training at the small unit level. You will also learn about Army programs that support counseling subordinates and evaluating performance, values and ethics, career planning, and legal responsibilities. At the conclusion of this course, you will be familiar with how to plan, prepare, execute, and continuously assess the conduct of training at the company level.

class: MILS 4411
class title: Leadership Laboratory IV
description: Senior cadets plan and operate the leadership laboratory programs for MILS I-III cadets. The development of planning and supervisory skills is emphasized. Cadets have an opportunity to practice leadership skills developed during previous ROTC training and summer camp experiences. Includes two to three hours a week devoted to physical fitness.

class: MSE 1140
class title: Materials: The Future of Energy
description: New technologies are urgently needed to fulfill projected global energy requirements. Materials properties typically limit the performance that can be achieved in generation, transport, and utilization of energy. This course will explore how new materials can increase our energy supply, facilitate transportation of energy, and decrease consumption. Materials issues in photovoltaic, fuel cell, battery, transportation, lighting, and building technologies will be studied.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of Calculus, Physics, and Chemistry at the high school level.

class: MSE 1190
class title: Biomaterials for the Skeletal System
description: Biomaterials exist at the intersection of biology and engineering. This course explores natural structural materials in the human body, their properties and microstructure, and their synthetic and semi-synthetic replacements. Bones, joints, teeth, tendons, and ligaments are used as examples, with their metal, plastic, and ceramic replacements. Topics covered include mechanical properties, corrosion, toxicity, and biocompatibility. Case studies of design lead to consideration of regulatory approval requirements and legal liability issues.

class: MSE 1700
class title: FWS: Scientific Breakthroughs: Reality or Hyperbole
description: Scientists excitedly announce their latest result—"it's a breakthrough!"—and science journalists and others proclaim that the breakthrough will revolutionize our lives. But is it so? Or are they speculating, exaggerating, or complicit in fraud? Some scientific breakthroughs do change our lives (CRISPR-Cas9) while others fade away ignominiously (Theranos). Case studies will help us develop a critical eye: we will read red-hot announcements along with dispassionate retrospectives, identifying the signs that distinguish flimsy or inflated claims from solid and credible statements. To detect hype, we need only common sense and logical reasoning, not specific or deep scientific expertise. Using carefully constructed and richly argued essays, along with dialogues and speeches, we will interpret and assess the claims of some prominent examples of trumpeted breakthroughs.

class: MSE 2610
class title: Mechanical Properties of Materials: From Nanodevices to Superstructures
description: Examines the mechanical properties of materials (e.g., strength, stiffness, toughness, ductility) and their physical origins. Explores the relationship of the elastic, plastic, and fracture behavior to microscopic structure in metals, ceramics, polymers, and composite materials. Discusses effects of time and temperature on materials properties. Emphasizes considerations for design and optimal performance of materials and engineered objects.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112.

class: MSE 2900
class title: Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering
description: This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work.

class: MSE 2910
class title: Research Involvement IIa
description: Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group.

class: MSE 3010
class title: Materials Chemistry
description: Provides a molecular understanding of materials properties: introductory quantum chemistry, physical organic chemistry, crystal/ligand field theory, sol-gel chemistry, electrochemistry, and corrosion.  Materials addressed include polymers, biopolymers, organic semiconductors, photoresists, silicate glasses, optical materials, and silica nanoparticles.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2090, MATH 2930, ENGRD 2620.

class: MSE 3030
class title: Thermodynamics of Condensed Systems
description: Introduces the three laws of thermodynamics as the fundamental basis for thermal and chemical equilibrium, coupled with statistical mechanical interpretations for entropy. Applies these principles to understand the equilibrium behavior of matter, with a focus on condensed liquid and solid phases. Develops concepts of phase equilibria, phase diagrams, chemical reactions, solution behavior and electrochemistry. Includes an introduction to statistical mechanics and applications in ideal gas behavior, gas and crystal heat capacity, and electron Fermi-Dirac statistics. Applications and examples will be drawn from a range of sub-disciplines spanning metallurgy to polymers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MSE 2610 or equivalent background.

class: MSE 3110
class title: Junior Laboratory I
description: Practical laboratory covering the characterization of materials, analysis of data, and presentation of results. Labs are based on concepts from the chemistry of materials (MSE 3010) and thermodynamics of condensed systems (MSE 3030) courses. Experiments include calorimetry, spectroscopic characterization, nanoparticle growth, polymer OLED devices, and molecular origins of spectral data features. Comprehensive data analysis including statistical data analysis, curve fitting and experimental uncertainty is emphasized. Includes an introduction to formal technical writing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2610/MSE 2610 or ENGRD 2620/MSE 2620. Corequisite: MSE 3010, MSE 3030 or permission of instructor.

class: MSE 3900
class title: Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering
description: This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work. Course may normally be used only as an advisor approved elective within the MSE curriculum.

class: MSE 3910
class title: Research Involvement IIIa
description: Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group.

class: MSE 4020
class title: Mechanical Properties of Materials, Processing, and Design
description: Relationship between microscopic mechanisms and macroscopic mechanical behavior of engineering materials, how mechanical properties can be modified, and criteria for selection and use of materials in design. Stress, strain and elastic constants as tensor quantities, viscoelasticity and damping, plastic deformation, creep deformation, fracture, and fatigue.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2610.

class: MSE 4030
class title: Senior Materials Laboratory I
description: Experiential learning course in which students participate in eitber a faculty or industry led, semester-long, team research project. Teams of three or four students research a topic, define research questions, design and conduct original research to answer the questions, and analyze their data. Group presentations and a final journal style paper required. In addition to developing research skills, students practice and develop communication/team skills, presentation skills, and technical writing skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 3110, MSE 3120, and MSE 3070.

class: MSE 4050
class title: Senior Experimental Thesis I
description: First semester of a two-semester thesis course involving research in faculty laboratories. Students work alongside faculty, postdocs, and graduate students to conduct original materials research over both semesters, and present the results in conference-style talks, a poster, a written thesis, and a research paper. Lectures and discussion groups explore aspects of effective research including defining problems, proposal writing, searching and using the existing research literature, communicating technical results in progress reports, talks, posters and papers. Completion of both 4050 and 4060 is required to satisfy the senior laboratory requirement for graduation, and is required for graduation with honors.

class: MSE 4071
class title: Materials Design Concepts Transition
description: Transition course between the initial design course MSE 3070 and the capstone design course MSE 4070. Students develop a proposal to prototype a product design concept after an investigation of available resources and a quantitative feasibility analysis. The students write a brief summarizing the business value proposition of the product in the context of a startup; this brief is used to identify MBA students as mentors for the 4070 teams.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 3070.

class: MSE 4510
class title: Materials Processing and Manufacturing
description: How a material is made into its final form has great importance to its structure and therefore to its properties and performance. This course is aimed at giving students an understanding of the state-of-the-art material processing and manufacturing technologies as well as how these processes influence materials' microstructure and properties. With a unified approach this course will introduce the fundamentals of materials processing applied to metals, ceramics, and polymers. Different material processing routes from melt-based and powder-based processes to shape forming, joining, surface engineering and additive manufacturing will be discussed. Emphasis will be placed on the physics of the process as well as on how the processes will influence the properties of emerging materials and applications.
outcome: Describe the physics of materials processes and manufacturing technologies., Identify and explain process-microstructure-property relationships for different materials processes., Design processing routes and justify process selection for a desired performance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2020 or ENGRD 2610.

class: MSE 4900
class title: Special Projects in Materials Science and Engineering
description: This course is intended for an individual student, or small group of students, to pursue a particular project, analytical investigation, or experimental investigation outside of regular courses. The course may also be used for formal or informal instruction supplementing regular courses in the major. Students taking the course must obtain approval from an MSE field member who will be responsible for supervising and evaluating the project work. Course may normally be used only as an advisor approved elective within the MSE curriculum.

class: MSE 4910
class title: Research Involvement IVa
description: Supervised independent research project in association with faculty members and faculty research groups of the department. Students design experiments, set up the necessary equipment, and evaluate the results. Creativity and synthesis are emphasized. Each semester may be taken as a continuation of a previous project or as a one-semester affiliation with a research group.

class: MSE 4950
class title: Undergraduate Teaching Involvement
description: Gives credit to students who help in the laboratory portions of select MSE courses. The number of credits earned is determined by the teaching load and is typically 1-3.

class: MSE 5005
class title: MSE MEng Professional Development
description: Development of leadership skills and application to problem solving, forming and working on teams, project management, and networking. Development of graphical, verbal, and written communication skills. Effective technical project presentations. Professional portfolio development and marketing. Interpersonal skills and effective group behavior. Corporate, academic, and other cultures.  Ethics in professional practice. Personal goal setting and progress metrics.
outcome: Demonstrate ability to apply theories of leadership to create an effective team environment in the workplace., Demonstrate improved networking, communication, and interpersonal skills associated with managing technical professionals and organizations, Demonstrate improved ability to gather, assess, and use information to make informed and well-reasoned decisions., Identify personal weaknesses and demonstrate improvements in personal productivity., 

class: MSE 5010
class title: MEng Project - Ongoing
description: Master of Engineering research project. Integration of technical, teamwork, and leadership skills to achieve a specific technical project goal defined by a project sponsor. MSE 5010 is for students who intend to complete their project in a later semester. Accordingly, success in MSE 5010 will be measured by progress against defined project goals. Students planning to complete course requirements in the current term should take MSE 5011.
outcome: Demonstrate ability to apply technical knowledge to solving real-world problems., Demonstrate ability to use self-awareness and specific knowledge of principles of leadership and working on teams in achieving technical objectives., Demonstrate ability to prepare and deliver high-level reports, oral presentation, posters and other forms of communication about project expectations, goals, and results to a wide range of audiences., Demonstrate understanding of and adherence to rigorous ethical principles in planning and execution of the project and in presentation of the results., 

class: MSE 5011
class title: MEng Project - Terminal
description: Master of Engineering research project. Integration of technical, teamwork, and leadership skills to achieve a specific technical project goal defined by a project sponsor. MSE 5011 is for students who intend to complete their project in the current semester. Accordingly, success in MSE 5011 will be measured by successful completion of all final project deliverables. Students planning to complete course requirements in a later term should take MSE 5010.
outcome: Demonstrate ability to apply technical knowledge to solving real-world problems., Demonstrate ability to use self-awareness and specific knowledge of principles of leadership and working on teams in achieving technical objectives., Demonstrate ability to prepare and deliver high-level reports, oral presentation, posters and other forms of communication about project expectations, goals, and results to a wide range of audiences., Demonstrate understanding of and adherence to rigorous ethical principles in planning and execution of the project and in presentation of the results., 

class: MSE 5070
class title: Interdisciplinary Design Concepts
description: This course emphasizes entrepreneurial driven technology designs (forward engineering) by integrating mechanical, chemical, and materials engineering through the understanding of early stage product development complexities. These complexities include staging invention and innovation via the critical selection of materials, assessing product mechanics and processes for final product function, performance, reliability, cost and technical marketability. Students will attend lectures, participate in establishing a Tech Startup integrated into the Johnson School MBA mentoring program, attend startup design reviews, give a series of individual/group presentations, and write a startup issue paper.

class: MSE 5210
class title: Properties of Solid Polymers
description: Course provides a general introduction to this diverse field including synthetic and natural polymers for engineering applications. Covers structure, order, and dynamics integrating aspects of chemistry, physics, and engineering as needed to understand macromolecular materials. Relationships between structure and properties are elucidated from a materials science perspective. Examples from current literature are also discussed to expose students to the state-of-the-art in the field.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2610 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MSE 3010 or permission of instructor.

class: MSE 5320
class title: Glass: Structure, Properties and Modern Applications
description: Course develops a foundational understanding of the glassy state and nature of the glass transition. Introduces phenomenology, chemistry and structure of key oxide glass families, with an emphasis on silicate glasses and the interaction of oxide components. Recent advances in glass relaxation and the implications of the statistical nature of glass structure are also discussed. Contemporary and emerging applications in optical communication, displays, and electronics packaging are explored within the context of key optical, mechanical and thermal properties.  Students will gain an understanding of modern glass theory, familiarity with glass technology, and practical know-how of a glass "power user".
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2060, MSE 3030. Corequisite: MSE 3040 or equivalent background.

class: MSE 5410
class title: Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics
description: This course will give an introduction to modern nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on integrated circuits manufacturing. Thermal budget, scaling of geometry, pitch and registry and control of parametric yield will be used for integration guidelines. Physical principles and process modeling will be covered in lectures and labs will include a series of fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing to produce semiconductor devices (Schottky diodes, pn junction diodes, MOS capacitors, and MOSFETs). Recent advances in nanofabrication will be briefly reviewed for their possible technology insertion and main integration challenges.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2620 or ECE 3150, or equivalent that covers basics on semiconductors, and semiconductor devices, MATH 2930-MATH 2940, CHEM 2090.

class: MSE 5411
class title: Nanofabrication and Characterization of Electronics Laboratory
description: This course provides an introduction to nanofabrication technologies with emphasis on Si-based integrated circuits manufacturing as well as modern electronics based on GaN, 2D materials etc. The lab, primarily taught in the Cornell Teaching Cleanroom, includes basic fabrication steps of lithography, metallization, plasma etching and annealing. A series of devices will be fabricated: solar cells, MOS capacitors and transistors, 2D transistors, GaN HEMTs and LEDs.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: ECE 4360/MSE 5410, AEP 6620 or equivalents.

class: MSE 5445
class title: Semiconductor Electronic and Photonics Devices
description: The class develops the fundamentals of semiconductor electronic and photonic devices that power to-day's computation, communication, and memory industries. It relates the basics of pn junctions to their applications in solar cells, light emitting diodes, and lasers. Majority and minority carrier transport in heterostructure bipolar transistors is related to gain and speed limits of amplifiers for 5G communications and beyond. Schottky diodes and their applications in power electronics, and in field effect transistors of many flavors ranging from Silicon CMOS and FinFETs to GaN high electron mobility transistors are covered. Tunneling transport, flash memory, and DRAM devices are discussed. The course uses industrially relevant simulation tools, and the laboratory component gives students firsthand experience of measuring and appreciating the power and the limitations of semiconductor devices, and the reason for their revolutionary influence on our lives and society. MEng students and ECE PhD students who enroll in the 5000 level will be required to complete one extra design laboratory project compared to the 4000 level class.
outcome: Obtain a well-grounded understanding of semiconductor device operation and advanced ideas in use in microelectronic industry and future generations of electronic circuitry., Learn through simulations, the aspects of physical behavior that analytic solutions are incomplete at and their more complete description of operational physics., Apply device fundamentals and simulation techniques to design modern nanoscale device structures., Develop comprehensive skills straddling electronics, integration, and devices as used in integrated circuits leading to effective communication of results., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECE 3150 or permission of instructor.

class: MSE 5520
class title: Advanced Topics in Metal Additive Manufacturing
description: This course delves into three distinct categories of metal additive manufacturing processes, each governed by unique principles: solidification-based techniques, sintering-dependent methods, and solid-state bonding processes. Students will explore the intricacies of powder bed fusion and direct energy deposition, where solidification mechanisms play a pivotal role in controlling microstructure formation. The course will provide a comprehensive understanding of how factors such as heat transfer, cooling rates, and alloy composition influence solidification behavior in these processes. Additionally, students will examine indirect metal printing methods, including extrusion, stereolithography, and binder jetting, which rely on sintering to fuse metal powders together. Detailed discussions will cover the sintering process, its underlying mechanisms, and its impact on the final properties of printed parts. Furthermore, the course will delve into metal additive manufacturing processes based on solid-state bonding, such as cold spray and sheet lamination. Students will explore the principles of solid-state bonding, including diffusion bonding and mechanical interlocking, and understand how these processes are applied to join metal powders/sheets without melting. Throughout the course, major alloys commonly used in metal additive manufacturing, such as Ni-based alloys, titanium alloys, steels, and aluminum alloys, will be discussed. Common defects encountered in metal printing technologies, post-processing steps for defect removal, and in situ monitoring techniques for defect mitigation will also be covered, ensuring students gain a comprehensive understanding of quality assurance in metal AM.
outcome: Students will be able to learn the fundamentals of additive manufacturing (AM) of polymers, metals, and ceramics., Students will be able to understand the operating principles, capabilities, and limitations of state-of-the-art AM methods, including fused deposition modeling, photopolymerization, laser melting/sintering, and material/binder jetting., Students will be able to understand properties of AM parts., Students will be able to realize industrial applications of AM., 

class: MSE 5625
class title: Supramolecular Biophysics
description: This course will describe how biomolecules cooperate to assembly structures, build material, and process information. We will start by discussing stoichiometric assembly macromolecular complexes. Then, we'll discuss how biomolecules assemble to make 1D, 2D and 3D materials. These include, cytoskeletal filaments, phospholipid bilayers, and biomolecular condensates. Finally, we'll discuss how cells use these phenomena for control (regulation) and computation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistical physics and/or thermodynamics; electrostatics; vector calculus; differential equations; basic scientific computing; introductory biology.

class: MSE 5801
class title: Materials Structure and Electronic Properties
description: Course is intended for first year graduate students in MSE, or graduate students in other fields, needing a solid foundation in structural and electronic properties for advanced study/research in materials. Atomic and molecular structure of crystalline, molecular, semicrystalline, and amorphous materials including: crystallography and symmetry; reciprocal lattice; order and disorder; point defects. Diffraction techniques for structural characterization: Bragg's Law, structure factors; thin film and size broadening; Debye scattering; symmetry breaking. Use of tensors to describe macroscopic physical properties and connections between symmetry and properties. Electrical properties of materials including: mechanisms of conduction; band structure and correlation with crystallography; modification of electrical properties in materials; charge transport across interfaces and semiconductor junctions; interaction of materials with light; fundamental semiconductor electronic devices (e.g. diodes, MOSFETS).
outcome: Students will demonstrate an understanding of material structure including bonding, atomic structure (crystallography) on atomic and mesoscopic length scales, for a range of materials including metals, semiconductors, oxides, glasses, and polymers using conceptual frameworks and terminology common in materials science., Students will demonstrate understanding of tensor properties in materials and transformation of the properties across crystal systems., Students will identify and analyze electronic properties of a wide range of materials (metals, semiconductors, polymers) using underlying properties including crystal structure, band structure, temperature, and processing history., Students will explain and analyze the behavior of common electronic materials and devices (e.g. diodes, MOSFETs) using concepts of band theory, carrier populations, and transport properties., Students will demonstrate an understanding of the link between material structure and underlying band diagram properties., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: engineering math and science equivalent to MATH 2940, PHYS 2214, and CHEM 2090.

class: MSE 5810
class title: Materials Chemistry
description: Provides a molecular understanding of materials properties: introductory quantum chemistry, physical organic chemistry, crystal/ligand field theory, sol-gel chemistry, electrochemistry, and corrosion.  Materials addressed include polymers, biopolymers, organic semiconductors, photoresists, silicate glasses, optical materials, and silica nanoparticles.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2090, MATH 2930, and ENGRD 2620.

class: MSE 5820
class title: Mechanical Properties of Materials, Processing, and Design
description: Relationship between microscopic mechanisms and macroscopic mechanical behavior of engineering materials, how mechanical properties can be modified, and criteria for selection and use of materials in design. Stress, strain and elastic constants as tensor quantities, viscoelasticity and damping, plastic deformation, creep deformation, fracture, and fatigue.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MSE 2610 or equivalents.

class: MSE 5830
class title: Thermodynamics of Condensed Systems
description: Introduces the three laws of thermodynamics as the fundamental basis for thermal and chemical equilibrium, coupled with statistical mechanical interpretations for entropy.  Applies these principles to understand the equilibrium behavior of matter, with a focus on condensed liquid and solid phases.  Develops concepts of phase equilibria, phase diagrams, chemical reactions, solution behavior and electrochemistry.  Includes an introduction to statistical mechanics and applications in ideal gas behavior, gas and crystal heat capacity, and electron Fermi-Dirac statistics.  Applications and examples will be drawn from a range of sub-disciplines spanning metallurgy to polymers. Extended assignments and independent study of advanced concepts required.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: background equivalent to MATH 2930 and elements of MSE 2610, or permission of instructor.

class: MSE 5998
class title: External Industrial Internship
description: Off-campus internship with industry in which a student gains knowledge and experience in the field of materials science.

class: MSE 8000
class title: Research in Materials Science
description: Independent research in materials science under the guidance of a member of the staff.

class: MSE 8005
class title: Principles and Practices of Graduate Research
description: A series of discussion-based workshops that help incoming PhD students in materials science and engineering form a cohort and succeed in their first year and beyond. Professional development topics include strategies for: matching and communicating with a research advisor, preparing and practicing for the PhD qualifying exam, transitioning from undergraduate study to graduate study, navigating professional responsibilities, persuasive writing for fellowship and funding applications, career planning and goal setting with individual development plans, and communicating professionally with elevator pitches. Qualifying exam and fellowship preparation create a framework for building personal and professional connections with other students. 
outcome: Demonstrate understandings of research expectations and best practices., Demonstrate abilities to sustain professional developments at the appropriate level., Master research communications both in writing and through oral presentations., 

class: MSE 8010
class title: Materials Science and Engineering Colloquium
description: Lectures by visiting scientists, Cornell staff members, and graduate students on subjects of interest in materials sciences, especially in connection with new research.

class: MSE 8020
class title: Materials Science Research Group Seminars
description: Short presentations on research in progress by students and staff.

class: MUSIC 1100
class title: Elements of Musical Notation
description: This four-week course fulfills the requirement of basic pitch, rhythm, and score-reading skills needed for some introductory courses and 2000-level courses with prerequisites.

class: MUSIC 1101
class title: Elements of Music
description: Have you ever wondered: is there music in outer space? what is music's "deep history"? how do we know music when we hear it? why does it make us want to dance? does it also make us "civilized"? and how do cultural, technological, and economic forces shape why we listen, when we listen, and what we listen to? Elements of Music offers the opportunity to think about all these questions (and more) through a wide variety of hands-on musical activities: experimenting with instruments, recording and manipulating sounds from the world around us, examining medieval musical books, dancing the Twist, sweatin' to the Oldies, playing samba, improvising, singing, and above all, listening to music from around the world.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 1205
class title: Introduction to Western Art Music
description: This course offers an introduction to the history and culture of Western art music, commonly known as "classical" music. While sketching an overview of important works, events, places, figures, and movements from the medieval period up to the present day, the course will focus on providing students with the knowledge, vocabulary, and listening skills required to locate themselves in relation to this vast and diverse body of music. No previous musical experience is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 1421
class title: Introduction to Computer Music
description: A composition-based introduction to computer hardware and software for digital sound and media. Fundamentals of audio, synthesis, sequencing, and other techniques for electronic music production. Each student creates several short compositions.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 1701
class title: FWS: Sound, Sense and Ideas
description: This First-Year Writing seminar provides the opportunity to write extensively about music's place in our world. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: MUSIC 2006
class title: Punk Culture: The Art and Politics of Refusal
description: Punk Culture–comprised of music, fashion, literature, and visual arts–represents a complex critical stance of resistance and refusal that coalesced at a particular historical moment in the mid-1970s, and continues to be invoked, revived, and revised. In this course we will explore punk's origins in New York and London, U.S. punk's regional differences (the New York scene's connection to the art and literary worlds, Southern California's skate and surf culture, etc.), its key movements (hardcore, straight edge, riot grrrl, crust, queercore), its race, class and gender relations, and its ongoing influence on global youth culture. We will read, listen, and examine a variety of visual media to analyze how punk draws from and alters previous aesthetic and political movements. No previous experience studying music is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 2101
class title: Tonal Structure and Design in Classical, Jazz, and Popular Music I
description: Study of the foundations of tonal music as manifested primarily in the Western literate tradition, also incorporating examples from various vernacular idioms. The course combines modern pedagogical methods with the study of historical sources and focuses on active learning at the keyboard. Topics to be covered include rudiments such as scales and triads; melodic and harmonic principles; voice-leading strategies and schemata; species counterpoint; improvisation, including techniques of embellishment; rhythm, meter, and gesture. During sections, the concepts and skills introduced in lecture will be practiced at the keyboard as well as vocally. Other section activities include elements of musicianship (aural skills, intervallic production and identification, rhythmic accuracy and fluency, etc.); transcription; sight singing; and score reading.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic ability to read/write music, to sing/play an instrument, and to navigate the keyboard (advanced skills not necessary), as evaluated by diagnostic exam (administered in first class meeting of semester) and/or permission of instructor.

class: MUSIC 2111
class title: Songwriting
description: Songwriting introduces students to the practice of songwriting through workshop-formatted classes. We will explore the ingredients of song (lyrics, melody, delivery, harmony, rhythm, form, texture, timbre, and arrangement) through analysis, composition, recording technologies, performance, and concert reports. Proficiency on one or more musical instruments is required. Songwriting can be taken as a stand-alone course or as part of the Songwriting sequence with Collaborative Songwriting.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 2244
class title: The Music, Art, and Technology of the Organ
description: The organ is an interdisciplinary wonder where mechanics, architecture, acoustics, religion, philosophy, literature, as well as the musical arts and sciences meet. This course uses the organ to explore music's relation to technology, history and culture, and in turn traces the technical and mechanical mysteries, and expressive possibilities, of the 'King of Instruments' across its long history. Students will gain 1) an understanding of some key aspects of musical history and repertoire; 2) a sense for the historical relation between music and technology; 3) a new knowledge of (and enthusiasm for!) the organ; and 4) an insight into the ways in which musical instruments and the musical practice associated with them are cross-cultural and interdisciplinary. With a key focus on the music of J. S. Bach, as well as on the reception of Bach's music in the 19th and 20th centuries, topics include the mechanics of organ construction, the North German organ art and the toccata, virtuosity and the use of the feet, the symphonic organ in the 19th century, 20th-century experimentation with organ sound, the organ and film. The course combines lectures with sessions at the organs as well as regular organ recitals. No prior musical experience necessary, although those interested (and with some keyboard skills) will have the opportunity for an introduction to learning to play – with both hands and feet.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 2311
class title: The Art and Craft of Music Journalism
description: This workshop in music journalism will sharpen your prose, your mind, and your tongue. We'll read the work of great journalists of the past and present who've written ardently and unforgettably about music - Joseph Addison, Hector Berlioz, Robert Schumann, George Bernard Shaw, Paul Griffiths, Greil Marcus, Stanley Crouch, and Alex Ross, among others. Thus inspired, we'll dive into the vibrant musical scene of Cornell and beyond, each participant writing weekly pieces for the class blog, whose title and format will be determined by class members. In the course of the semester each student will accumulate a substantial portfolio of journalism, and stroke a love of writing about music.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (WRT-AG)

class: MUSIC 2321
class title: Groove: Black Music Theory
description: In this course students will analyze the development of black musical traditions from a diasporic perspective and extend their musical awareness beyond familiar timelines and geographies. The intention of this course is for students to develop a deeper understanding of black music composition, structure, and form by introducing higher-level musical language and grammar. This will include musical notation, rhythmic and harmonic analysis, part-writing, listening, and other skills that can facilitate a deeper engagement with black musical cultures. By the end of the course, students will develop their own theoretical interpretations of what unites and distinguishes black musical practices across time and space.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 2341
class title: Gamelan in Indonesian History and Cultures
description: This course combines hands-on instruction in gamelan, Indonesia's most prominent form of traditional music, and the academic study of the broader range of music found in contemporary Indonesia, including Western-oriented and hybrid popular forms. Students thus engage with music directly, and use it as a lens to examine the myriad social and cultural forces that shape it, and that are shaped by it.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 3111
class title: Jazz Improvisation and Theory I
description: An introduction to fundamental jazz theory, technique, and applied skills.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 3122
class title: The Art of Conducting
description: This course introduces fundamentals of conducting, including, but not limited to, gesture and movement; score reading, analysis, and interpretation; ear training; and historical practices. Students explore these topics in a variety of musical contexts, including orchestral, wind ensemble, choral, and mixed chamber ensembles. Classes are a mix of lectures, demonstrations, peer-to-peer learning activities, and frequent conducting experiences.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ability to read staff notation.

class: MUSIC 3316
class title: What's in a Sound? Gender and Race in Sound Cultures
description: What can we hear or see in a sound? Can the sound of a voice conjure traces of a body? How does sound, musical or otherwise, construct gender and race? In this course, we will consider how listening, speaking, and music operate as mechanisms of representation. We will pay particular attention to the work representations do and how they connect to systems of power and identity. From voice-overs and machine listening to reggaeton and Brazilian funk, we will examine the ways sound practices not only mirror gendered, racial, and sexual politics but also produce them. Through several case studies, we will find that the very possibilities of representations are embedded in historical contexts and the variability of media objects.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: MUSIC 3322
class title: Gospel and The Blues: A Black Women's History I, 1900-1973
description: In her pathbreaking text Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval Saidiya Hartman writes that "young Black women were radical thinkers who tirelessly imagined other ways to live and never failed to consider how the world might be otherwise." This two-semester course endeavors to travel through those worlds using the cultural and musical forms of gospel and the blues as our compass. The first semester is guided by the work of scholars and writers like Angela Davis, Hazel Carby, Alice Walker, and Gayl Jones and artists like Ethel Waters, Bessie Smith, Victoria Spivey, and Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Together we will interrogate the spectrum of lived experiences making for a kaleidoscopic sonic history of joy, pleasure, sorrow, resistance, and everything in between.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 3431
class title: Sound Design
description: Covering the basics of digital audio, bioacoustics, psychoacoustics and sound design, as they apply to theatre, film and music production. Students create soundscapes for text and moving image using ProTools software.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: some experience with audio/video recording or editing recommended.

class: MUSIC 3511
class title: Individual Instruction
description: Individual instruction in voice, organ, harpsichord, piano and fortepiano, violin, viola, cello, percussion, and some brass and woodwind instruments to those students advanced enough to do college-level work in these instruments. For more information about individual instruction, see the section titled Musical Instruction.

class: MUSIC 3513
class title: Individual Instruction
description: Individual instruction in voice, organ, harpsichord, piano and fortepiano, violin, viola, cello, percussion, and some brass and woodwind instruments to those students advanced enough to do college-level work in these instruments. For more information about individual instruction, see the section titled Musical Instruction.

class: MUSIC 3514
class title: Individual Instruction
description: Individual instruction in voice, organ, harpsichord, piano and fortepiano, violin, viola, cello, percussion, and some brass and woodwind instruments to those students advanced enough to do college-level work in these instruments. For more information about individual instruction, see the section titled Musical Instruction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: successful audition with faculty sponsor required.

class: MUSIC 3602
class title: Chorus
description: A nationally renowned choral ensemble and vibrant student-driven organization specializing in repertoire for sopranos and altos. Collaborates frequently with the Glee Club to present mixed-voice repertoire and major works. Maintains a rigorous rehearsal and concert schedule and performs a wide variety of choral repertoire from throughout history and across the globe. Tours and records annually. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MUSIC 3902 for new Chorus members, based on audition.

class: MUSIC 3603
class title: Glee Club
description: A nationally renowned choral ensemble and vibrant student-driven organization specializing in repertoire for tenors and basses. Collaborates frequently with the Chorus to present mixed-voice repertoire and major works. Maintains a rigorous rehearsal and concert schedule and performs a wide variety of choral repertoire from throughout history and across the globe. Tours and records annually.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: MUSIC 3902 for new Glee Club members, based on audition.

class: MUSIC 3604
class title: Chorale
description: This course provides comprehensive training designed for singers to enhance their musical skills, sight-reading abilities, and vocal technique. The Chorale functions as a performing group with a strong emphasis on cultivating vital proficiencies to an advanced standard, equipping students with the requisite musical groundwork essential for a lifelong in choral music. Open to Cornell's undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and staff members who share a passion for singing, the Chorale invites participation. An expedited audition process is mandatory to assess suitable ensemble placement.

class: MUSIC 3609
class title: Brazilian Ensemble - Deixa Sambar
description: Deixa Sambar performs several styles of samba, Brazil's national music. Members need not have prior background in music-making, but a good sense of rhythm is desirable. Members include students as well as Ithaca community members, brasileiros as well as newcomers to Brazilian culture. Rehearsals develop playing skills, with a deep emphasis on cultural understanding of this vital, community-based music.

class: MUSIC 3610
class title: Cornell Gamelan Ensemble
description: Study and performance of Central Javanese gamelan, the best known traditional music of Indonesia. For more information see https://blogs.cornell.edu/gamelan/.

class: MUSIC 3613
class title: Cornell Steel Band
description: The Cornell Steel Band explores the wide variety of music for an orchestra of instruments fashioned from 55-gallon oil drums, and an "engine room" of non-pitched percussion. Interwoven into the focus on hands-on practice is reflection on the meanings of steel band, historically and in the present, in its native Trinidad and Tobago and here in the United States. Formal musical training is not necessary, though a sense of rhythm and a good ear are helpful.

class: MUSIC 3616
class title: Cornell Hip-Hop Collective
description: This course is open to experienced rappers, beatmakers, and vocalists interested forging collaborative relationships with other students. Taking as a foundation hip-hop's relationship to social justice, each semester we will work together to plan and record an EP on a theme or keyword chosen as a group. We will construct and analyze playlists of inspirational material, identifying specific hip-hop compositional strategies for creating beats and rhymes on a theme, and will use these tools to create and workshop our own collaborative tracks in weekly meetings. Please contact the instructor to audition.  

class: MUSIC 3621
class title: Cornell Symphony Orchestra
description: The Cornell Symphony Orchestra provides its members the opportunity to develop their artistry and enhance their knowledge of orchestral repertoire in a dynamic and engaging environment.  Students perform a variety of repertoire that encompasses from the baroque to the 21st century through a range of symphonic activities: orchestral performances, composer and repertoire readings, educational and community outreach events, tours, and collaborations with faculty and guest artists.

class: MUSIC 3631
class title: Cornell Wind Symphony
description: The Cornell Wind Symphony unites student musicians in an ensemble dedicated to the study and performance of emerging and traditional wind repertoire.  The Cornell Wind Symphony unites student musicians in an ensemble dedicated to the study and performance of emerging and traditional wind repertoire. In Spring 2021, the Wind Symphony will likely make music in both in-person and remote settings. Full details and audition instructions will be posted on www.cuwinds.com as they become available.

class: MUSIC 3634
class title: Cornell Percussion Group
description: The Cornell Percussion Ensemble studies and performs conducted and un-conducted percussion chamber music from the rapidly expanding repertoire. Utilizing the stylistic and sonic variety that is unique to the medium, the ensemble performs a variety of composers and styles, including pieces composed within the past few years. Members of the ensemble will develop strategic listening and communication techniques through the study of chamber music while advancing their interpretative and technical skills. The ensemble performs mostly notated music, and players should have experience with reading advanced music notation. Prior experience with percussion instruments is required, and participants must meet with the instructor for a short audition before enrolling.

class: MUSIC 3660
class title: Music Improvisation Ensemble
description: The Music Improvisation Ensemble provides students with the opportunity to explore the elements of music from an improviser's perspective. This ensemble is open to any level of musician. An audition is required at the beginning of the semester simply as a means of introduction. Please contact instructor Annie Lewandowski for more information: apl72@cornell.edu.

class: MUSIC 3901
class title: Supplemental Study in Music
description: Intended primarily for music majors, this option allows students enrolled in an approved 1000- or 2000-level 3-credit music history course to pursue independent research and writing projects. Students will study various topics in music history at a more advanced level through supplementary reading, discussion, and writing, by arrangement with the professor.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: enrollment in an approved 2000-level, 3-credit music history course.

class: MUSIC 3902
class title: Choral Musicianship
description: Co-requisite for new Cornell Chorus and Glee Club members, based on audition, and open to all students regardless of participation in an ensemble. This course provides a comprehensive perspective of choral music designed for singers to enhance their musical skills, foundational and advanced approaches for sight-reading abilities, aural skills, vocal technique, and appreciation of different styles of choral music. Recommended for singers at all levels wishing to improve musicianship skills.

class: MUSIC 4241
class title: Historical Keyboarding
description: Based on the holdings of the Cornell Center for Historical Keyboards, this course will be based on encounters with organs, clavichords, harpsichords, pianos, and synthesizers. In approaching them, we will treat the term "keyboard" as both a noun and a verb: like "skateboard" or "snowboard," it can represent both an object and ways of interacting with it. Students will situate each instrument within geographical and historical ecologies that acknowledge the origins of its materials, the labor that brought it into being, the play that has animated it, the repertoire that has sustained it, and the people it has connected. Over the course of the semester, each student will define and pursue a substantial research project based on a single instrument.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 4412
class title: Making Sound Futures
description: Making Sound Futures is a transdisciplinary, transformative, hands-on studio course that nurtures curiosity and promotes experimentation, intuitive decision-making, and risk-taking. Embracing imperfection and uncertainty, we will construct sonic instruments to facilitate self-discovery, promote understanding of others, inspire imaginative exploration, and serve as a tools for problem-solving. Our activities will include close listening to sounds and then designing new instruments, individually and collaboratively, to recreate these sounds and others that have not yet been imagined. Raising awareness about how we contribute toward the future, we will devote ourselves to creating materials and techniques that the next generation of students can use and develop further. We will aim to generate designs for the future that are themselves open to reuse and reimagination.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: MUSIC 4501
class title: Individual Instruction
description: Individual instruction in voice, organ, harpsichord, piano and fortepiano, violin, viola, cello, percussion, and some brass and woodwind instruments to those students advanced enough to do college-level work in these instruments. For more information about individual instruction, see the section titled Musical Instruction.

class: MUSIC 4615
class title: Jazz Ensemble
description: Study and performance of classic and contemporary big band literature. Rehearsals twice a week with two to four performances per semester.

class: MUSIC 4616
class title: Jazz Combo
description: Study and performance of classic and contemporary small-group jazz.

class: MUSIC 4621
class title: Cornell Chamber Orchestra
description: The Cornell Chamber Orchestra provides its members the opportunity to develop their artistry and enhance their knowledge of chamber orchestra and string repertoire in a dynamic and engaging environment.  Students perform a variety of repertoire that encompasses works from the baroque to the 21st century through a range of activities: chamber performances, composer and repertoire readings, educational and community outreach activities, tours, and collaborations with faculty and guest artists.

class: MUSIC 4631
class title: Chamber Flute Ensemble
description: Small ensembles meet weekly to explore diverse flute repertoire including a variety of instrumentation (piccolo, alto flute, bass flute).  There will be a performance opportunity at the end of the semester on a chamber concert or in a studio class setting.

class: MUSIC 4641
class title: Advanced Instruction in Gamelan
description: Concentrated instruction for students in advanced techniques of performance on Indonesian gamelan instruments.

class: MUSIC 4651
class title: Chamber Music Ensemble
description: Study and performance of chamber music works from duos to octets, for all instruments and voice. Students will be expected to attend a one hour coaching each week and rehearse on their own as well.  There will be a final performance at the end of the semester and possible additional performance opportunities.

class: MUSIC 4901
class title: Independent Study in Music
description: Independent study affords students the opportunity to pursue special interests or research not treated in regularly scheduled courses. A faculty member, who becomes the student's instructor for the independent course, must approve the proposed study and agree to provide continuing supervision of the work. Students must prepare a proposal for independent study. To apply for independent study, please complete the online form.  Undergraduate student and faculty advisor to determine course of study and credit hours.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: experience in proposed area of study.

class: MUSIC 4911
class title: Honors in Music
description: First semester of the two semester honors program. In conjunction with faculty, selected candidates formulate a program that allows them to demonstrate their musical and scholarly abilities, culminating in an honors thesis, composition, or recital (or some combination of these), to be presented in their senior year.

class: MUSIC 6201
class title: Research and Critical Methodologies
description: This course explores two necessary components for advanced study and research in the discipline of music:  1) practicalities of research, including concepts, methodologies, and tools, which introduces students to social constructions of knowledge and how it is managed by libraries and archives, as well as many types of bibliographic tools, both printed and electronic; 2) critical approaches and theories of music, sound, performance, and cultural meaning, which introduces the students to key disciplinary and interdisciplinary intellectual movements and scholarly works.

class: MUSIC 6239
class title: Global Currents: Immobility and Multi-Sited Ethnography
description: Ever-increasing global interconnection drives some of the most pressing political and ethical questions of our time. This seminar centers on two intersecting areas of inquiry. The first deals with the nature of global movements: how people, ideas, arts, and capital move through world. Engaging postcolonial theory and scholarship on contemporary migration and transnationalism, we will interrogate the idea of borders and nations as well as those categories—like diaspora—that surpass or circumvent them. The second addresses how and why we might study these processes ethnographically. Here we will consider the potential and limitations of multi-sited and global ethnography, and question the possibility of an activist ethnography of global interconnection.

class: MUSIC 6241
class title: Historical Keyboarding
description: Based on the holdings of the Cornell Center for Historical Keyboards, this course will be based on encounters with organs, clavichords, harpsichords, pianos, and synthesizers. In approaching them, we will treat the term "keyboard" as both a noun and a verb: like "skateboard" or "snowboard," it can represent both an object and ways of interacting with it. Students will situate each instrument within geographical and historical ecologies that acknowledge the origins of its materials, the labor that brought it into being, the play that has animated it, the repertoire that has sustained it, and the people it has connected. Over the course of the semester, each student will define and pursue a substantial research project based on a single instrument.

class: MUSIC 6312
class title: Synthesizing Pop: Electronics and the Musical Imagination
description: From Switched-On Bach to Synthpop and EDM, since the late 1960s electronic synthesizers have expanded the sonic palette and identity formation of popular musicians, leading to new concepts of sound and performance as well as communal, technological, and human interfaces. This course will explore the cultural history of analog synthesizers and their progeny of digital devices (samplers, sequencers, drum machines) and desktop technologies that revolutionized popular music soundscapes and embodiment. Synthesis will be considered as both a musical technology and theoretical concept that together spark imagined cyborg identities and post-human futures, challenging and resynthesizing categories of gender, sexuality, and race. Student will also have the opportunity to engage with Cornell's Robert Moog Archive and develop research, creative, or curation projects. This course is open to graduate students and fourth-year undergraduates by permission. Undergraduates should contact the instructor before enrolling.

class: MUSIC 6412
class title: Making Sound Futures
description: Making Sound Futures is a transdisciplinary, transformative, hands-on studio course that nurtures curiosity and promotes experimentation, intuitive decision-making, and risk-taking. Embracing imperfection and uncertainty, we will construct sonic instruments to facilitate self-discovery, promote understanding of others, inspire imaginative exploration, and serve as a tools for problem-solving. Our activities will include close listening to sounds and then designing new instruments, individually and collaboratively, to recreate these sounds and others that have not yet been imagined. Raising awareness about how we contribute toward the future, we will devote ourselves to creating materials and techniques that the next generation of students can use and develop further. We will aim to generate designs for the future that are themselves open to reuse and reimagination.

class: MUSIC 7111
class title: Composition
description: A course for graduate or advanced undergraduate composers (by permission with a portfolio audition) seeking individual music composition instruction, the course combines one-on-one meetings with group seminars featuring workshops, master classes, and/or visiting guests. In addition to individual and group meetings, composers may have opportunities for the reading and/or performance of their work.

class: MUSIC 7362
class title: Musical Value: Histories of Aesthetics
description: Entering the lexicon of European philosophy in the 1700s, aesthetics attempted to name and analyze a particular kind of experience, judgment, object, or value. Its questions have been extended, critiqued, reformulated, and dismissed in the centuries since. In this seminar, we will read important texts in modern aesthetic theory (Hume, Kant), as well as some notable critiques that followed, from philosophy itself (Shusterman, Roelofs, Ngai) and from sociology (Bourdieu, Wolff). We will also consider two unavoidable questions for modern/colonial aesthetics: what to do with the so-called primitive art of non-European cultures (Boas) and how to understand the challenge of Black aesthetics in the twentieth century (Locke, Baraka, Wynter).

class: MUSIC 7443
class title: A New Fable: Engaging the World Through Music
description: How can we make musical works that are open, collaborative fields of activity for human and nonhuman beings, connected to our respective physical and social environments, processes, and territories? Through examining case studies in contemporary creative practice, this seminar will encourage students to generate ideas in a wide variety of ways and work together to realize them. The group will search for common nodes of interest and desired routes for engagement, combining oral and written modes of coordination. Participants from all backgrounds are welcome—the only requirement is a willingness to work together imaginatively and openly.

class: MUSIC 7901
class title: Independent Study in Music
description: Independent study affords students the opportunity to pursue special interests or research not treated in regularly scheduled courses. A faculty member, who becomes the student's instructor for the independent course, must approve the proposed study and agree to provide continuing supervision of the work.

class: NACCT 5520
class title: Advanced Accounting
description: Detailed analytical study of special issues and situations in financial accounting. Continuous emphasis is placed on the relationship between theory and practice to reflect the latest professional pronouncements. Highly technical topics related to corporation, partnership, government, and not-for-profit organizations, with a focus on business combinations and the particular accounting challenges that they present.

class: NACCT 5530
class title: Auditing and Assurance
description: Theory and practice of independent examination of financial statements. Discussion of relationships with clients; working papers, assurance procedures, including evaluations of internal controls, accounting principles, risk assessment, liability, and professional ethics.

class: NAVS 1101
class title: Introduction to Naval Science
description: Involves a study of fundamental aspects of naval science. This includes contributions to sea power, different warfare communities involved in the physical development of naval forces, and study of resource management and naval science prospects for the future. Naval uniforms, customs, and traditions are also covered.

class: NAVS 1141
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: NAVS 2201
class title: Leadership and Management
description: Introduces the student to the fundamental concepts of leading Sailors and Marines and serves as part of the NROTC leadership development continuum.  Develops the elements of leadership vital to the effectiveness of Navy/Marine Corps officers by reviewing the theories and parameters of leadership and management within and outside of the naval science and progressing through values development, interpersonal skills, management skills, and application theory.  Practical applications are explored through the use of experiential exercises, readings, case studies, and laboratory discussions.

class: NAVS 2241
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: NAVS 3201
class title: Naval Ship Systems I (Engineering)
description: Introduces primary ship-systems and their interrelationships. Basic principles of thermodynamics, propulsion, mechanical operation, internal communications, electronics, ship structure, and other marine systems are covered.

class: NAVS 3341
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: NAVS 4302
class title: Naval Operations and Seamanship
description: Covers the application of the nautical rules and maneuvering board in order to avoid collisions at sea. Other aspects of naval surface ship operations that are introduced include visual and electronic communications methods, tactical disposition of forces, ship handling theory, and deck seamanship topics.

class: NAVS 4441
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: NBA 3000
class title: The Business of Entrepreneurship
description: The Business of Entrepreneurship is a comprehensive introduction to the key aspects of envisioning, starting and running a new business. The Business of Entrepreneurship focuses both on concepts and frameworks in entrepreneurship and on "doing" entrepreneurship. Students will form teams, ideate new businesses, complete customer development, construct business models and work towards defining minimum viable products. Topics covered will include definition of the market, sales and distribution, competition, hiring and management of people, cash flow and financial management, making compelling pitches and raising capital. The course culminates in a capstone project of writing a business plan and presenting to a group of entrepreneurs and investors. This course is appropriate both for students interested in launching an entrepreneurial endeavor or students who will benefit from learning frameworks applied to the entrepreneurial process.

class: NBA 4120
class title: Equity Investment Research and Analysis
description: This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of equity research and is similar to that provided to aspiring analysts, as apprentices, in buy-side investment firms. The course provides a comprehensive framework for analyzing equity securities and developing formal target prices and BUY/SELL/HOLD recommendations. Each student defines an industry to study and prepares an "industry review." Each student analyzes in detail one stock in the industry and prepares a stock report. A live portfolio is invested in late March with student picks. Topics include the research process, analysis strategies, valuation techniques and portfolio construction methods. Templates, examples and detailed feedback on draft reports are provided. Students should be prepared to conduct rigorous, creative research based upon their own work and insights. Class is taught in a hybrid format composed of in-class lectures, workshops, guest speakers, reading assignments, research assignments, lecture video assignments and student presentations.
 

class: NBA 4720
class title: Family Enterprise Management and Governance
description: This course is targeted at students that are or plan to be involved in family enterprises-irrespective of how-as an investor/owner, future leader, consultant, or employee. It will bring to light, many of the unique features (advantages and challenges) of a family enterprise. Students will be exposed to some critical themes that are unique to such enterprises-Role Definition, Effective Governance, Conflict Management, Succession and Fund Raising/Exit. They will acquire practical tools to effectively deal with them. One of the unique features of this class is that students will have an opportunity to discuss and analyze the specific opportunities and challenges they face in the family enterprise they represent (the level of sharing is of course entirely optional and up to each student to define). They will work on a "Student Case" project that allows them to dissect the issues and develop solutions, in a supportive team environment. This will be woven into the more traditional means of learning such as lectures, case studies, and guest speakers. Students will leave the course armed with clear insight into what to expect as they enter the family enterprise and how to navigate their unique environments. In doing so, they will amplify their ability to create enterprise, family and personal success.

class: NBA 5035
class title: Philanthropic Leadership
description: This course will prepare students to systematically plan for volunteer leadership through board service and financial giving across the course of their careers. Topics to be covered include: motivations for board service and philanthropic giving; the role of philanthropy in society; non-profit board structures, governance, and risk mitigation; impact and other forms of giving; board practicum. The course will be informed by theory and experiential in nature. Students will have the opportunity to research local non-profit organizations, determine whether this is the type of board they want to serve on, and, thanks to the generosity of a grant to our course from The Philanthropy Lab, award ~$50,000 to local organizations.

class: NBA 5060
class title: Financial Statement Analysis
description: The purpose of this course is to give students a broad understanding of financial statement analysis and valuation issues. The emphasis is on helping students understand the basic equity research process for use in investment and business decision applications. The course format is a combination of examples, case studies, and lectures. Potential topics include information sources, strategic ratio analysis, accounting quality, non-GAAP metrics, cash flow analysis, forecasting financial statements, and firm valuation using discounted cash flow and residual income techniques. The course deliverables include an equity research project and a final exam.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5000, NCC 5060 or permission of instructor.

class: NBA 5070
class title: Entrepreneurship for Scientists and Engineers
description: The course provides a hand-on experience for learning the key philosophies and tactics of entrepreneurial activity and the entrepreneurial mindset.  The unique focus of this class is that it is designed for Scientists &amp; Engineers who would start a business that would have meaningful technology at the heart of the company.  This includes the development of a viable business concept, customer discovery, the evaluation and planning of the start-up businesses, go-to-market strategy, intellectual property, and financing. The course utilizes lectures,  directed readings, and guest speakers. The goal is a meaningful understanding of how to design a new business venture, achieved by building and communicating the framework for a viable business.

class: NBA 5075
class title: Big Red Ventures
description: Big Red Ventures is Cornell's student-run venture fund. Founded in 2000 as a student project, BRV fund managers source new investment opportunities, conduct opportunity assessments and due diligence, make investment recommendations, assess and vote on recommendations of other fund managers, and make investments in early-stage, high-growth startup companies. Fund managers also manage existing portfolio investments, conduct annual portfolio valuations, and prepare investor materials such as an annual report and annual meeting. Fund managers operate under the guidance and oversight of experienced practitioner faculty. BRV is a selective program, with an application and interview process open to MBAs, JDs, and PhD candidates; the course is only open to students who apply to become and are selected as fund managers (see brventurefund.com for application details and timing). Full participation at either the Ithaca or Cornell Tech campuses, both fall and spring semester, is required.

class: NBA 5090
class title: Advanced Financial Statement Analysis
description: This course builds on the material of NBA 5060 and focuses on more advanced financial statement topics and specialized industries. Topics may include investment research, accounting analysis, accounting quality, credit analysis, and advanced valuation issues.   Instruction focuses on a combination of lecture and case-based discussion.  Students are expected to have taken NBA 5060 or possess a good understanding of basic financial statement analysis.  The material is designed to broaden student's understanding of financial statement analysis and complement the tools developed in NBA 5060. The course deliverables include case write-ups, an equity research project, and a final exam.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NBA 5060, finance immersion course, or permission of instructor.

class: NBA 5100
class title: Social Entrepreneurship
description: This class is designed to provide the participants with a viable pathway to understanding their role in making an enterprise more socially valuable in today's ever changing world. This course will explore the rising interest in practicing capitalism in order to benefit society as a whole.  In this class we will be tapping into the inherent feelings many students have that doing well and doing good in business is attainable.  The course will further explore potential business practices that are not only a force for doing good in society but lead to actually being socially and environmentally restorative.  Students will learn to identify their core passion and how to make that the centerpiece of their entrepreneurial path.  Students will identify the different purposes business have and evaluate their value to society utilizing a taxonomy of business structures from profit maximization to not for profit.  Students will evaluate what business structure is most favorable for their individual entrepreneurial path and will identify actual business practices that promote the thriving of the human spirit.

class: NBA 5110
class title: Financial Modeling
description: Financial modeling is the art and science of constructing spreadsheet models of firms' future financial statements. This class draws on and integrates students' knowledge of concepts learned in prior accounting classes by modeling the effect on the income statement, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows of financial transactions such as leveraged buyouts, mergers and acquisitions, and corporate reorganizations.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5000 or equivalent, as well as mastery of basic Excel skills.

class: NBA 5111
class title: Foundations of Financial Modeling
description: This course is NBA 5110 for non-MBA students. The course integrates financial analysis and financial modeling concepts to prepare students for careers in investment banking. Early classes focus on understanding and interpreting financial statements. Focus then shifts to building economically sound financial statement forecasts to create financial statement models. The second half of the course uses financial statement models to model equity valuations, alternative investment and financing decisions, leveraged buyouts and recapitalizations, and merger and acquisition transactions. The course presumes familiarity with basic financial accounting concepts, as well as basic corporate finance concepts and time-value of money.

class: NBA 5120
class title: Applied Portfolio Management
description: This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of fundamental research, quantitative equity security selection, and equity portfolio management. Students have the unique opportunity as part of this course to manage the Cayuga Fund, a student managed fund with $1 million in assets under management from the Cornell University endowment. Students will serve as fundamental analysts, quantitative analysts and portfolio specialists for the fund. Instruction on analysis, portfolio management and the investment business are included in this course. Students are expected to assume leadership for managing the Fund by the end of the semester. The experience is similar to that offered to rising analysts and portfolio managers in buy-side investment firms. Students will learn credit research techniques, maintain their stock coverage and continue managing the Fund in the spring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: NBA 5121.

class: NBA 5121
class title: Seminar in Equity Research - Cayuga Fund
description: An accounting/finance elective course that focuses on the management of the Cayuga Fund, a live small-cap equity portfolio. It is taken concurrently with NBA 5120. See NBA 5120 for more information.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NBA 5120.

class: NBA 5130
class title: International Finance Cases
description: International finance is different because of two issues, exchange rate volatility and barriers to the flow of capital. Furthermore, political risk is heightened when money crosses borders, and governance, disclosure, law, and regulation are more varied than in a single-country context. The purpose of this course is to practice applying the ideas and methods of finance to cross-border problems. The course is centered on seven cases including discussions of related research and other materials. An introductory Managerial Finance class is a pre-requisite.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or equivalent.

class: NBA 5150
class title: Leadership Theory and Practice
description: This course will focus on the challenges of effective leadership in a complex world. The course has four significant parts: 1. Exploring historical and contemporary theories and models of leadership through the required text and selected articles; 2. Examining and applying the Johnson School's Leadership Model; 3. Analyzing the practical challenges of leadership through case studies, and executive speakers; 4. Developing self-awareness of the student's leadership strengths and weaknesses through the use of behavioral instruments and group exercises and creating a personal action plan for improvement. A critical element of this course will be the coaching and feedback students will receive on their own leadership styles and behaviors from their peers and instructor.

class: NBA 5175
class title: Life Science Entrepreneurship in Practice
description: The course provides a hands-on experience for learning the key philosophies and tactics of entrepreneurial activity surrounding the launch and early growth of life science ventures. We will focus on learning how life science technology concepts in the pharma/biotech, health, veterinary, and agri-tech sectors are converted into sustainable and scalable businesses. We will also consider the unique aspects of starting a life science venture related to R&amp;D/product development, regulatory/clinical aspects, reimbursement/revenue models, and manufacturing/operations.

class: NBA 5180
class title: Design and Innovation
description: In today's business landscape, creative problem solving has become a critical tool for leaders to drive innovation and transformation across different industries. This hands-on course serves as an initial introduction to various design tools and aims to develop a creative problem-solving opportunity mindset to identify new avenues to create meaningful impact. The curriculum dives into foundational design concepts, design thinking, and human-centered design principles. This course requires agility, openness to new ways of thinking, and the ability to embrace ambiguity. It is structured around project-based teamwork to foster collaboration and aims to establish a culture of diversity through open and constructive critiques. With support from selected readings, case studies, and insights from guest speakers across various industries, the course ensures a comprehensive understanding of design and innovation thinking and methods.

class: NBA 5185
class title: Green Tech Innovation in Practice
description: Focused on developing the next generation of clean energy, climate tech, and sustainability-oriented startup leaders, this course empowers PhD and MBA candidates from across Cornell's colleges to dive into hands-on, innovation-driven startup creation. This workshop course leverages PhD participants' research expertise and thesis subjects to shape innovative business model hypotheses. Collaborative, cross-disciplinary teams, inclusive of researchers, cultivate their 'entrepreneurial judgment' by strategically testing these hypotheses to mitigate business model risks. Seasoned entrepreneurs, investors, and faculty provide ongoing feedback to refine insights and set team priorities. Armed with essential tools, training, and deeper entrepreneurial judgment, attendees are prepared to spearhead their own startups or lead in the flourishing green tech sector. Enrollment is limited to participants in the Green Technology Innovation Fellowship with instructor permission.

class: NBA 5220
class title: Equity Investment Research and Analysis
description: This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of equity research and is similar to that provided to aspiring analysts, as apprentices, in buy-side investment firms. The course provides a comprehensive framework for analyzing equity securities and developing formal target prices and BUY/SELL/HOLD recommendations. Each student defines an industry to study and prepares an "industry review." Each student analyzes in detail one stock in the industry and prepares a stock report. A live portfolio is invested in late March with student picks. Topics include the research process, analysis strategies, valuation techniques and portfolio construction methods. Templates, examples and detailed feedback on draft reports are provided. Students should be prepared to conduct rigorous, creative research based upon their own work and insights.

class: NBA 5245
class title: Introduction to Macroeconomics
description: The course introduces the basic tools of economic policies and the key issues of modern economies. The course provides the necessary knowledge to analyze the basic goals of macroeconomic policy i.e., low unemployment, stable inflation, financial stability, and stable and strong economic growth.  Topics covered include, among others, economic growth, expansions and recessions, monetary and fiscal policies, GDP, inflation, unemployment, the public debt, interest rates, the trade deficit, exchange rates, and global markets. Although focusing on the U.S.— the world's largest national economy—and paying special attention to its institutions and problems, the course will emphasize the global context in which it functions by periodically shifting attention to other economies around the world. Globalization-related issues such as international financial markets and global crises will be given special attention.

class: NBA 5260
class title: Leaders in Emerging Markets
description: Emerging markets represent now almost 40% of the world economy and eight out of the 20 biggest economies are from emerging markets with China as the second biggest economy in the world. As emerging countries are becoming more prominent in the world, MBA students need to have the knowledge and the tools to navigate its economic and business challenges. The course will also be looking at business strategies for emerging markets. Students will learn from lectures from the faculty and a number of executives from companies working in and from emerging markets. The Goals of this course are 1) To provide the opportunity to learn about Emerging Markets and leveraging the faculty lectures and the excellent speakers EMI brings 2) To increase connections between speakers and their organizations with EMI fellows and MBA students 3) To highlight the challenges and opportunities of doing business in emerging markets and 4) To engage students in active discussions about issues around emerging markets.

class: NBA 5330
class title: Management Cases
description: The course builds case-cracking skills, a CEO perspective and developing and defending a fact-based point of view.

class: NBA 5380
class title: The Business Idea Factory
description: Do you want to become an entrepreneur, but you don't yet have that brilliant idea? This class will help you come up with new ideas and evaluate which ones are the most worth pursuing to ensure you invest your time and energies on ideas that have the most promise. The first section of the course will be about places and processes that you can use to find inspiration to come up with a large number of potential business ideas. We will then walk through a systematic process to evaluate, validate, and quantify the best ideas for each team. This process will be assisted by experienced entrepreneurs as guest speakers who will share the inspirations for their businesses, the methods they used to select those ideas as worthy of pursuit, as well as insights into their careers.

class: NBA 5410
class title: Project Management
description: This course covers basic concepts in planning, scheduling and monitoring a project. The tools provided in the course aim to help plan, manage and deliver projects on time and on budget.

class: NBA 5430
class title: Financial Markets and Institutions
description: This course presents an overview of the structure and function of the financial markets. The course attempts to provide a general working knowledge of the financial system by examining not only how various intermediaries and markets work, but also their evolution over time.  The role of central banks, and their operations, is particularly emphasized, as is the nature of risk management both within the financial institution and more broadly for the financial system. Topics considered here include swaps, credit derivatives, value at risk models, and systemic risk. Just as intermediation has moved from institutions to markets, the course follows a similar evolution in the topics studied over the course of the semester. Market topics examined include securitization, the Blockchain, digital currencies and the impact of fin tech on intermediation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or NCC 5560.

class: NBA 5531
class title: Federal Income Taxation
description: This is an introductory course covering the present structure of tax law in the United States, measurement of taxable income, fundamentals of tax planning and compliance, and the tax issues encountered by various taxpayers (e.g., individuals, corporations and partnerships).

class: NBA 5540
class title: International Finance
description: Applies principles of finance to the international setting. International finance is different in two basic respects: (1) the existence of multiple currencies adds risk to investment and financing decisions; (2) when corporations and portfolio investors cross international borders, both problems and opportunities arise. This course focuses on these issues and highlights how finance theory can be extended to address them. Students apply the basic principles of international finance to a variety of problems. The course helps students understand the ideas and research results of international finance and adapt what they learn to the practical problems in the increasingly globalized business world. The first part of the course outlines exchange rate volatility, barriers to international capital flows, and the value of international diversification. The second part presents a variety of problems, examples, and applications from the three basic themes described in part one. Spreadsheet assignments and a group presentation requiring data analysis develop research skills and illustrate academic concepts. Exams consist of computational, short answer, and short essay questions.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or equivalent. 

class: NBA 5550
class title: Fixed Income Securities and Interest Rate Options
description: Designed to study the pricing, hedging, and risk management of fixed-income securities, interest rate and credit derivatives. Topics include the term structure of interest rates, interest rate swaps (caps, floors, collars), credit risk, corporate bond valuation, and credit derivatives. The method of instruction is lectures and discussion, with computer illustrations. A secondary theme of the course is the use of models in practice for risk management. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060, NCC 5010.

class: NBA 5600
class title: Demystifying Big Data and FinTech
description: The goal of the course is to give a systematic and rigorous introduction to the emerging areas of financial technology, cryptocurrencies and DeFi, digital economy, crowd-based financing and lending, and applications of big data, machine learning, and AI in business settings. This elective consists of seven intensive sessions of lectures, discussions, guest talks by industry leaders, and readings of media and research articles.

class: NBA 5640
class title: The Business of Entrepreneurship
description: The Business of Entrepreneurship is a comprehensive introduction to the key aspects of envisioning, starting and running a new business. The Business of Entrepreneurship focuses both on concepts and frameworks in entrepreneurship and on "doing" entrepreneurship. Students will form teams, ideate new businesses, complete customer development, construct business models and work towards defining minimum viable products. Topics covered will include definition of the market, sales and distribution, competition, hiring and management of people, cash flow and financial management, making compelling pitches and raising capital. The course culminates in a capstone project of writing a business plan and presenting to a group of entrepreneurs and investors. This course is appropriate both for students interested in launching an entrepreneurial endeavor or students who will benefit from learning frameworks applied to the entrepreneurial process.

class: NBA 5670
class title: Management Writing
description: This course is designed to develop your writing skills in the context of practical business applications. It begins with a strategic perspective on business writing and focuses on the elements that make your writing clear, concise, efficient, and effective.  You will improve the clarity, content, structure, and visual design of your management writing, as well as increase your confidence in your communication skills. The course is suitable for students for whom English is their native language, as well as students for whom English may be a second or third language.

class: NBA 5680
class title: Management Presentations
description: NBA 5680 focuses on advancing the management presentation skills of graduate students. The course covers effective strategies and best practices for business presentations both in terms of content/organization and delivery (verbal and non verbal). The course emphasizes active learning and continuous student practice with feedback from peers and the instructor. By the end of the class students raise their understanding and appreciation of effective presentation practices, increase their awareness of their own strengths and weaknesses and become noticeably improved communicators.

class: NBA 5690
class title: Management Consulting Essentials
description: This course will help students learn about consulting and the skills and capabilities to be a successful consultant. The course will begin with a module on successful case interviews. The consulting process will be discussed and why it leads to successful solutions for complex business problems. With the consulting process understood the course will focus on developing a problem definition diagnostic framework, hypotheses, analytical approaches, data collection and conclusions. The course will also include concepts critical to consulting including interviewing to collect information, facilitating meetings, managing clients and their expectations, selling recommendations and developing impactful presentations. The course will use a combination of lectures, case work, individual and teamwork to learn the concepts.

class: NBA 5700
class title: Core Teams Practicum
description: This course is designed to provide you with instruction and experience in leading and contributing to high-performing teams that: (1) set clear goals and objectives; (2) develop, implement, and enforce appropriate internal team norms; (3) effectively collaborate, taking maximum advantage of diverse strengths and backgrounds; (4) produce well-reasoned analyses of complex business problems; and, (5) provide team members with appropriate constructive feedback from which further growth and development can occur.

class: NBA 5710
class title: Cornell Management Simulation
description: You've learned finance, marketing, operations, accounting, economics, management, leadership, statistics, and strategy. You've done a deep dive into at least one of these subject areas. But how do they fit together?  How are they used to actually run a company? The Cornell Management Simulation elective course will give you the chance to form a team and run a company that will compete against your classmates in a simulated industry; this strategic management simulation was written by Johnson faculty and has been part of the MBA curriculum for over 20 years. At the beginning of the simulation, each team develops a strategy, and before the results of the last decision have been determined, presents an analysis of its performance and lessons learned in a final meeting. The first course meeting (mandatory to be in the class) introduces the simulation and its mechanics as well as a discussion of company strategy. Future weekly meetings review key business topics that teams encounter as they run their companies, and include time for teams to review their performance and work on their company decisions. Grades are based on the value created for the company's shareholders (relative to other firms in the same industry), the team's strategy, and the instructor's evaluation of team's performance at the board meeting.

class: NBA 6030
class title: Strategies for Sustainability
description: Corporations are under increasing pressure from shareholders, employees, communities, and activists to account for the environmental and social effects that their activities create. Increasingly, firms are taking strategic approach to addressing these issues, developing programs that fit their capabilities, resources, and cultures.  Through a combination of cases, readings, lectures, and videos, class sessions will ensure students develop an understanding of sustainability in the context of business as well as strategic business decision-making in the context of sustainability.  NBA 6030 is open to all graduate students.

class: NBA 6050
class title: Strategy Formulation and Competitive Analysis
description: The course will help students develop their strategic thinking, strategy formulation and strategic analysis skills. It will use a series of cases involving companies in different strategic situations such as in an emerging  industry, mature industry, transforming industry, network effect industry, etc. and engage students in  developing and / or evaluating appropriate strategies in these varied situations. It will help build a skill in formulating strategy, refining strategy and very importantly evaluating strategy.

class: NBA 6060
class title: Evaluating Capital Investment Projects
description: This course focuses on the financial-economic analysis of corporate investment (i.e., capital budgeting) decisions. One of the most important decisions a firm makes is how to best allocate its capital resources.  This course will help students understand the tools and frameworks needed to analyze and communicate the value impact of proposed capital expenditures and strategic decisions.  This course is especially useful to anyone preparing for a career role with input to business investment decisions, including marketing, operational, and corporate financial managers. Both conceptual understanding and practical implementations through case studies will be emphasized.

class: NBA 6100
class title: Applied Operations Strategy
description: Operations are integral to every enterprise, within and across their supply chain.  Whether it is a traditional product-manufacturing supply environment, retail setting, service operations, financial services or pure e-commerce, successfully defining and executing an operations strategy is critical to the success of the enterprise.  It is vital to understand the role and value of operations as an integral enabler of value for an enterprise business strategy. The Applied Operations Strategy course is designed to provide essential grounding on both why comprehensive operations strategies are designed to support the goals of the enterprise, and, importantly, how such strategies are executed successfully.  The curriculum will take a topical approach  to understanding the role an operations strategy plays, such as: How a legacy internal combustion engine car maker enters the electric car market; Supply chain resiliency – think how you configure global operations when facing a pandemic; Integrated sales &amp; operations planning for consumer packaged goods or consumer electronics; Off-shoring, near-shoring, on-shoring supply chain strategies; Digital supply chain and Industry 4.0 strategy and execution; How a start-up ecommerce platform manages supply &amp; demand when they own no physical assets. A combination of case- and instructor experience is used to cover most of the topics, with senior operations executive guest speakers planned. Other Johnson faculty may participate to complement a case discussion to address the theory behind the practice. Applied Operations Strategy is a half-semester elective class that may be taken as a stand-alone class or as a complement to other operations and supply chain management courses.

class: NBA 6130
class title: Women and Leadership
description: What are the facts about the current state of women as leaders? What special challenges face women as they transition from students to managers to leaders? What do the latest research findings offer to  organizations that want to benefit from more women leaders? In this course, we will take a multi-pronged approach to learning about women and leadership to better prepare students of both genders to lead in organizations. To do this, we will analyze case studies of women leaders pulled from a range of industries. We will review the current state of empirical evidence about the status of women as leaders, investigate the barriers that have made it more difficult for women to reach the top of the business world, and consider ways in which individuals and organizations can overcome them. Finally, there will be time to engage in deep reflection about what students expect from their careers, as well as a chance to consider the pathways they must take to become effective and inclusive leaders in increasingly diverse organizations.

class: NBA 6145
class title: AI Strategy and Applications
description: Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a science and set of computational techniques that are inspired by the way that humans use their nervous systems and bodies to sense, learn, reason and take action. In recent years, AI has emerged as one of the most important disruptions facing business and society over the next several decades. While AI is not new and has been around for more than 60 years, the confluence of certain trends over the last decades and accelerating technological change has introduced a new urgency into the study of the impact of AI on business, government and society.

class: NBA 6190
class title: Leaders in Sustainable Global Enterprise
description: Leaders in Sustainable Global Enterprise, is meant to provide students the opportunity to hear in-depth presentations from private, public, or non-profit leaders who are on the cutting edge of the business-sustainability domain. Session structures can vary in format, and could include lectures, living case studies, panel discussions, and moderated Q&amp;A, etc. The slate of speakers is structured to represent a variety of functional areas as well as industrial sectors. The course is meant to expose students to a diverse array of business-sustainability topics and issues facing today's leaders; as well as the actions those leaders are taking to ensure the competitiveness of their organizations in the marketplace.

class: NBA 6215
class title: Introduction to Python for Business
description: The rapid accumulation of high-dimensional data has opened new opportunities to make informed business decisions. Python is a widely used programming language for analyzing data-rich business problems. Python is designed to describe, categorize, and analyze this large-scale data easily and intuitively. This course presents a unique opportunity to cover the basics of programming with Python while exposing students to various kinds of applications. The objective of the course is to build from scratch students' ability to write codes in Python, read other people's code, analyze, visualize, and interpret data.

class: NBA 6230
class title: Actualizing Your Startup - Part I
description: Actualizing Your Startup Parts 1 and 2 are performance learning courses, based around student projects in the form of students and teams starting their own companies. eLab's instructors serve as coaches, guides, mentors, teachers, and assistants to the teams, and will coordinate the involvement of a number of high-profile mentors from the startup and venture capital community. Students will enhance their business and entrepreneurship learning by putting theoretical concepts into practice in starting and growing their own companies in a team environment. We expect that students will take this opportunity to "make it real" - eLab is not about starting theoretical companies, or theoretically exploring potential business ideas. Rather, it is about starting real companies that have the potential to grow and provide employment and economic benefit to their founders, and to provide deep experiential learning in starting and growing a business. Participation in this course is limited to students that are on an admitted eLab team. eLab has an application process which is described at elabstartup.com.

class: NBA 6290
class title: Special Topics in Marketing
description: This course focuses on emerging and underappreciated topics such as entrepreneurial marketing, technology-enabled marketing structures, private brands, and branding of not-for-profits. Specific topics vary from year to year, in accord with its raison d'etre. Each topic is led by an industry guest speaker. Students are required to read related material before each class meeting and to analyze a current case provided by the speaker. Students, working in teams, present their case analysis in class and receive feedback from the speaker. Some students are also required to submit an individual term paper. The class is graded pass-fail only, with a pass requiring full attendance at a minimum of five of the six class meetings with speakers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5030.

class: NBA 6320
class title: Core Leadership Skills for a VUCA World
description: Core Leadership Skills for a VUCA World is designed to provide students with an opportunity to expand their knowledge and understanding of the key leadership skills required for success in today's volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous business world through discussion and interaction with an experienced practitioner and former leader of the United States Army. The course will be comprised of four modules: 1) Leadership Principles for a Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous World; 2) Developing and Communicating Vision and Strategy; 3) Setting Conditions for Success; and, 4) Character and Leadership. Coursework to include readings, discussion, and a final paper.

class: NBA 6390
class title: Data Driven Marketing
description: Deals with the use of data to make marketing decisions. Introduces concepts, methods, and applications of analytics to address marketing questions. Three broad areas are covered: Digital Advertising Analytics, Demand Analytics, and Customer Analytics. Unlike marketing courses that focus on conceptual material, this course provides skills to translate conceptual understanding into specific operational plans, ­a skill in increasing demand in organizations today. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on return on investment in marketing spending. The course is particularly valuable to students planning careers in management consulting, marketing, and market research. It is designed for students who have some background in quantitative methods and have a willingness to deal with mathematical concepts. Knowledge of Excel and regression analysis is required.

class: NBA 6420
class title: Supply Chain Analytics
description: A supply chain is a network of organizations that are involved in the different processes and activities that produce value in the form of products and services. Supply chain management is an essential tool for firms to achieve profit maximization as well as social responsibility. Innovations arise from three main sources: application of information technology, reconfiguration of the supply chain network, and modification of incentives. In this course, we will introduce analytical methods and innovative designs of supply chain management, with applications in both developed and emerging economies. We will address the following issues: cross-docking and automation; global project management and coordination; dynamic pricing and revenue management; humanitarian logistics and sustainability; and counter-strategy for illicit supply chains.

class: NBA 6430
class title: Managerial Spreadsheet Modeling
description: The goal of this hands-on course is to develop proficiency in quantitative modeling within the environment of Microsoft Excel. Students develop and use spreadsheets to analyze a variety of business problems. The course has two principal components: spreadsheets and models. Spreadsheet topics include principles of good spreadsheet design, the effective presentation of information through spreadsheets (including graphical controls and dashboard design), and advanced Excel features (e.g., conditional formatting, data validation). Modeling topics include the art of finding the appropriate level of modeling detail, sensitivity analysis, and using solver and regression to perform optimization and estimation tasks.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or NCC 5560.

class: NBA 6460
class title: Financial Institutions
description: This course explores the economic functions, institutional design, and regulation of financial institutions. Beginning with conventional deposit-taking banks, the course examines the risks embedded within the business of banking, along with how regulation seeks to manage these risks. It then expands this framework to examine several other forms of 'non-bank' financial intermediation including investment banks, insurance companies, wholesale funding markets, structured finance markets, money market and other investment funds, and financial market infrastructure. The course also examines some of the related consumer/investor protection problems and how financial regulation seeks to address them.

class: NBA 6530
class title: Strategic Alliances
description: In the fast-paced world of global business, companies very often find themselves constrained in their ability to access markets, technology or other key drivers of success. This highly interactive course explores how companies might use strategic alliances as a lever to help achieve strategic growth objectives. It will explore various types of strategic alliances, from arms-length contracts to joint ventures, delving into the rationale and pros and cons of each major type of alliance. It will further arm students with tools to manage a strategic alliance through its life cycle stages-from ideation to negotiation, governance and wind down. Students will emerge from this class with a unique, practical toolkit on how to utilize strategic alliances to deliver business success. This course will be taught from the perspective of a senior executive responsible for a global business.

class: NBA 6540
class title: Power and Politics in Organizations
description: This course is about the art and science of influence in organizations. While many people are ambivalent, even disdainful, of those who wield power and influence at work, organizations are fundamentally political entities, and power and influence are key mechanisms by which things get done. Without political capital your ideas will too often fail to be recognized or implemented and your career progression will be more challenging and potentially limited. All aspiring leaders therefore stand to benefit from developing greater political acumen. This course aims to enhance your political intelligence and interpersonal influence through building your knowledge base and equipping you with an expert toolkit to become a more astute manager and successful leader without sacrificing your authenticity. After taking this course, you will be able to: (1) diagnose the sources and distribution of power in organizations, (2) formulate strategies for building your own sources of power, (3) understand your own natural influence style, and sharpen your ability to interact and communicate with others in ways that make you more influential, (4) apply the principles of power and influence in groups and organizations, and (5) anticipate and guard against the pitfalls of power including ethical lapses and the loss of power.

class: NBA 6620
class title: Brand Management
description: Which brands do you feel connected to? Starbucks? NPR? Johnson? What draws you into these brands?  How do firms create compelling brand experiences? How could you build a brand that fosters relationships with consumers? This course takes a consumer-centric approach to explore such questions with the goal of identifying the ingredients for building and managing brand relationships, where brand is defined as "a reputation." To bridge theory and practice, the course interweaves lectures, case discussions, guest speakers, and in- and out-of-class exercises. The course culminates in a Brand Audit, which provides a systematic way to inventory current brand assets and develop strategy.  Please note that although this course does include individual assessments, it also has a strong emphasis on teamwork (e.g., two in-class team presentations).

class: NBA 6630
class title: Managerial Decision Making
description: This course attempts to make its participants better managerial decision makers. However, most students find that the course applies equally well to their personal decisions. There are two other objectives. The first is to convey an enduring understanding of decision concepts, skills, and tools that, taken as a whole, comprise a troubleshooter's guide to dealing with the uncertainty, complexity, and conflict of the professional world. The second is to provide a framework for a good decision process in which all of the decision concepts, skills, and tools fit coherently. The pedagogical approach uses lectures, in-class exercises, and applications.

class: NBA 6682
class title: Crisis Communications for Business Leaders
description: Business leaders today constantly face crises that threaten their company's reputation. Such defining moments require effective crisis communication to mitigate negative effects, build trust with the organization's internal and external audiences and navigate through the crisis gracefully and effectively towards resolution. In this course you will learn to anticipate and appreciate the complexities and challenges of brand reputation management during a crisis and develop strategies and techniques to communicate with various constituencies, especially the media/public, employees and major stakeholders. You will apply principles of effective crisis communication management through a simulation, and will develop message maps for emergency and other crisis scenarios. Course work includes readings, case analyses, and simulations.

class: NBA 6720
class title: Family Enterprise Management and Governance
description: This course is targeted at students that are or plan to be involved in family enterprises-irrespective of how-as an investor/owner, future leader, consultant, or employee. It will bring to light, many of the unique features (advantages and challenges) of a family enterprise. Students will be exposed to some critical themes that are unique to such enterprises-Role Definition, Effective Governance, Conflict Management, Succession and Fund Raising/Exit. They will acquire practical tools to effectively deal with them. One of the unique features of this class is that students will have an opportunity to discuss and analyze the specific opportunities and challenges they face in the family enterprise they represent (the level of sharing is of course entirely optional and up to each student to define). They will work on a "Student Case" project that allows them to dissect the issues and develop solutions, in a supportive team environment. This will be woven into the more traditional means of learning such as lectures, case studies, and guest speakers. Students will leave the course armed with clear insight into what to expect as they enter the family enterprise and how to navigate their unique environments. In doing so, they will amplify their ability to create enterprise, family and personal success.

class: NBA 6730
class title: Derivatives Securities Part I
description: The market for derivative securities has experienced dramatic growth in recent years.  Market participants use financial instruments such as futures, options, and other derivatives to transfer and manage risks, as well as express views on market outcomes.  While the study of derivatives is inherently quantitative, my goal is to help students develop strong intuition and build the skills necessary to understand, value, and use derivatives.  In order to provide a useful treatment of the topics suitable for a rapidly changing environment, I will stress fundamental concepts and emphasize important applications throughout the course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or permission of instructor.

class: NBA 6740
class title: Derivatives Securities Part II
description: This course builds on the foundations established in NBA 6730 (Derivative Securities I) and focuses on options markets. We will start with option types and strategies. After observing the limitations of model-free approach, we will spend an important portion of our time on how to utilize models to price and understand options. Specifically, we will study binomial option pricing, the Black-Scholes model, and the associated Delta-Hedging. We will conclude with Volatility and (if time permits) Credit Risk.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NCC 5060 or permission of instructor.

class: NBA 6820
class title: Negotiation I: Negotiation Essentials
description: Negotiation is the art and science of securing an agreement between people who have some conflicting interests.

class: NBA 6890
class title: Startup Legal Issues - Early Stage Financing and VC Terms
description: An analysis of key issues that an emerging high growth business must consider and address when incorporating and raising capital.

class: NBAY 5180
class title: Design Thinking
description: In today's business landscape, creative problem solving has become a critical tool for leaders to drive innovation and transformation across different industries. Design has rapidly emerged as a driver for innovation, organizational change, and growth. Design Thinking has been adopted by major consulting firms, large corporations, tech start-ups, and NGOs. The course offers an opportunity to learn, practice, and enhance design skills through a 'deep dive.' Structured around project-based teamwork, fostering collaboration is crucial. Students focus on exploring human-centered innovation using clear, hands-on frameworks. With support from selected readings, case studies, and insights from guest speakers across various industries, the course ensures a comprehensive understanding of design and innovation thinking and methods.

class: NBAY 5300
class title: Entrepreneurial Finance
description: This course is designed to introduce students to the challenges and pitfalls of financing new enterprises.  The class sessions will combine lectures and cases.  The course covers three broad topics:  Identifying and valuing opportunities, contract design and financing alternatives, and exit/harvesting strategies.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5310.

class: NBAY 5301
class title: Introduction to Entrepreneurial Finance: Firm Valuation and Term Sheets
description: This course is designed to introduce students to the challenges and pitfalls of financing new enterprises. The class sessions will combine lectures and cases. The course covers three broad topics: identifying and valuing opportunities, contract design and financing alternatives, and exit/harvesting strategies.

class: NBAY 5360
class title: Technology Company Exits
description: Technology Company Exits is structured to provide MBA students with "real world" corporate transaction experience in an academic environment. Students, working individually and in teams, will play the role of investment bankers advising technology founders on exit transactions. In this course, students will be introduced to the three predominant technology company exit transactions: IPO, merger and acquisition, and leveraged buyout. After a brief academic introduction to each transaction type, students will work on "real", forward-looking transactions involving companies in the technology sector.

class: NBAY 5695
class title: Strategic Communication

class: NBAY 5795
class title: Advanced Strategic Analysis
description: The course will help students develop their strategic thinking, strategy formulation and strategic analysis skills.  It will use a series of cases involving companies in different strategic situations such as in an emerging industry, mature industry, transforming industry, etc. and engage students in developing and / or  evaluating appropriate strategies in these varied situations. It will build directly upon your prior core class  in strategy but delve deeper and help build a skill in formulating strategy, refining strategy and very importantly evaluating strategy.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5310.

class: NBAY 6080
class title: Building Entrepreneurial Ventures
description: This course will take students through the entire entrepreneurial journey – opportunity recognition and evaluation, fundamentals of business model design and implementation, building the founding team and hiring early employees, evaluating funding options and acquiring financial resources, managing risk and uncertainty, growth and scaling up, and finally, realizing the (financial as well as personal) value of the venture through exit options. The course will help students learn and apply the lean startup methodology, popular among new digital ventures. We will primarily use case studies of a variety of digital entrepreneurial ventures and case-based exercises to illustrate these concepts and practice real world applications. BEV will equip students with the lean startup toolkit and is primarily designed for students interested in starting, working at, advising, or financing new ventures, but can also be of use to someone interested in leading entrepreneurial innovation in established firms. The final deliverable will be student choice: a take-home case analysis, or a business plan.

class: NBAY 6090
class title: Digital Marketing
description: This course introduces students to fundamental concepts in digital marketing and prepares them for roles as a marketer, entrepreneur or product manager. Students will be exposed to an overview of the major players in the advertising and digital industries, as well as a variety of tools commonly found in start-ups and technology firms. Course material will be covered with a mixture of case studies, lectures, and guest speakers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5310.

class: NBAY 6170
class title: Designing Data Products
description: This course will help students to gain the necessary skills of building a data product and using AI (artificial intelligence). Many industries today are faced with high data volumes and there is an understanding that "data is the new gold". Business or customer value is not created by data; but rather, it is created by the application of data, ML (machine learning) and deep learning AI. This course trains students to link the possibilities of data and AI to business needs. This course will be held over seven class sessions of double-period length. These classes will be a combination of lectures, discussions, interviews, hands on training with data and AI and peer reviews. At the end of this course students will build their own AI driven product. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5310.

class: NBAY 6210
class title: Technology Management
description: This is the foundational course for MBA students regarding technology considerations in business management decisions. Students will be exposed to a variety of current technologies and trends enabling them to achieve success in technology-driven enterprises and new ventures. The course explains the ever-evolving nature of technology opening new competitive advantages through the introduction of knowledge-intensive products and services.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TECHIE 5310.

class: NBAY 6525
class title: Security for Business Organizations
description: In the course you will learn about the most important trends in cyber security: evolving threat landscape and  customer expectations of security; the need for companies to be open and trustworthy when it comes to handling data; changes in the US and global regulations in security and privacy; significant market growth of security technologies.

class: NBAY 6620
class title: Becoming an Effective Product Manager
description: Product Managers find themselves at the center of product-led companies, wearing many different hats, and having a lasting impact on organizations. While a technical background is an important quality for a PM to have, "softer" skills are equally important and necessary to truly be effective. A common misnomer is that a PM is the "CEO of their own product"; while the Product Manager does set the vision and metrics for success of their product much like an executive, they also need to be able to influence and persuade stakeholders and teammates at all levels to be successful. Most of the people who will help you as a PM build your product won't report to you (i.e., engineering, finance, marketing, design). This class will help you build the skills to get your team on board with your vision and help you convey these abilities in a situation where you are being evaluated.

class: NBAY 6760
class title: Decision Models
description: One goal of this course is to develop your proficiency in quantitative modeling within the environment of Microsoft Excel (good spreadsheet design and effective presentation of information through spreadsheets, including advanced Excel features). Another goal is to extend your skills and understanding of advanced quantitative tools such as Solver optimization algorithms, Monte Carlo simulation, and decision analysis. The course is hands-on, and largely conducted in "lab".

class: NBAY 6950
class title: The Business of Gaming: Perspectives in Strategy, Technology and Marketing
description: Technologies and platforms developed for gaming are even forming the foundations of emerging development of the metaverse and virtual reality.  Even Microsoft, the company built on OS and Office, owns Xbox and Minecraft and just made the almost $70 billion acquisition of Activision Blizzard. This crash course in video games will examine the gaming's beginnings in coin operated arcades, through the console wars, to today's mobile and cloud platforms, and the business drivers behind the modern industry.  We'll examine the media impact and revenue models, and explore marketing and promotion opportunities to reach the huge base of consumers who play games.  The class will review the social media tools and ecosystems surrounding the gaming universe, such as Twitch, Discord, and how they work for building and maintaining and connection to the communities in the gaming world.  We'll finish by looking forward to virtual worlds, e-sports, and emergent metaverse platforms, as well as NFT based gaming.

class: NCC 5000
class title: Financial Accounting
description: This course is an introduction to the reporting system used by businesses to convey financial information to parties outside the firm.  Primary emphasis will be placed on understanding the financial reports that are the end product of this system--what they tell us and what they do not tell us about a business.  The accounting principles, conventions and concepts underlying financial reporting will be examined with the objective of developing your ability to interpret and analyze financial statements.

class: NCC 5020
class title: Microeconomics for Management
description: Introduces microeconomic theory and applies it to problems faced by managers. Topics include supply and demand, consumer behavior, pricing when a firm has market power, and the role of contracts. The course employs a lecture format and emphasizes problem solving. Grading is based on quizzes, a midterm and a final exam.

class: NCC 5030
class title: Marketing Management
description: Understanding your core customer is important for all business leaders. This course will expand your knowledge of the fundamental concepts of customer-centric management. After taking the course, students will be able to formulate and communicate rigorous and practical solutions to commonly faced managerial problems across a variety of industries. The course will provide students with the background and tools to:

class: NCC 5040
class title: Leading Teams
description: The 21st century organization and its managers are operating in the midst of the Fourth Industrial Revolution where work is knowledge-based, change is constant, and collaboration is essential. To succeed in a changing and competitive global environment, organizations must be able to learn, adapt, and continually innovate. Teams are the basic building block of organizational innovation and managers are responsible for effectively leading them. Managers have the power to direct their teams towards collaboration and innovation, however without the right skills, managers will fail to realize the full potential of their employees. This course is designed to help you develop skills to lead teams effectively. We will discuss what makes a team effective, the challenges teams typically face, and ways to direct teams toward success. 
The course is designed to provide you with concepts and competencies to help you throughout your managerial careers.  The concepts will include both time-tested ideas and very recent findings, putting you at the cutting edge of management thinking.  But learning the lessons intellectually is the easy part.  You will also have the chance to practice and experiment with these ideas.  Through class exercises, videotaped exercises and cases, you will have the opportunity to turn the concepts into competencies.

class: NCC 5050
class title: Critical and Strategic Thinking
description: Succeeding in any business leadership role requires you to think critically, and make quality decisions, even in the face of challenges such as imperfect/incomplete information, changing and unforeseen circumstances, and human nature in all of its complexity and unpredictability. Major content themes of this course focus on constructing a persuasive argument and deconstructing arguments made by others; recognizing and avoiding reasoning flaws and the forces that make us most susceptible to such flaws; approaching business problems systematically and thoroughly; and producing a problem solution that is (a) well-reasoned; (b) likely to be well-received by ultimate decision makers; and (c) able to be implemented successfully. 

class: NCC 5060
class title: Managerial Finance
description: This is the MBA core finance course at Johnson. It is meant to give students a strong basis in finance that can be used in their professional career as well as to provide the background necessary for more advanced finance classes. The topics we cover include how to move cash flows in time, the methods and principles of capital budgeting, bond and stock valuation, and how to characterize risk and calculate the cost of capital.

class: NCC 5090
class title: Strategy
description: Among the critical tasks facing any senior manager are the creation, implementation, and evaluation of a business unit's strategy. This course seeks to provide the management student with the tools and frameworks essential to carrying out these tasks. Many of these tools and frameworks are based on recent advances in game theory, industrial organization, and organization theory, although the course also draws from the older business policy tradition. Students who successfully complete this course are able to analyze industries, identify areas of strategy advantage and disadvantage, and devise strategies that exploit advantages and remedy disadvantages.

class: NCC 5500
class title: Financial Accounting
description: Introductory accounting course that examines the subject from the viewpoint of users external to the organization. Topics include transaction analysis; the accounting cycle; financial-statement preparation, use, and analysis; revenue recognition and cost measurement; present value; and problems in financial-accounting disclosure.

class: NCC 5540
class title: Managing and Leading in Organizations
description: People are the heart of organizations. Managing them well requires a sophisticated understanding of the self and others. Good leadership requires deliberate thought and significant effort. It is a continually developing life skill that becomes increasingly important for effectiveness as one rises in the hierarchy of an organization. To help students in their ongoing efforts to be equipped for success as leaders, the two primary purposes of this course are: (1) to build skill and broad fluency with organizational leadership and behavior (2) to develop a personal leadership philosophy based on a) an informed understanding of management concepts at the individual, group, and organizational level and b) self-knowledge and introspection regarding personal values, goals, and perspectives about oneself and others.

class: NCC 5560
class title: Managerial Finance
description: This course provides an introduction to business finance through lectures and assignments. The content of the course varies with the section and instructor. Topics may include basic financial accounting, time value of money, stock and bond valuation, capital budgeting, portfolio theory, asset-pricing models, cost of capital, dealing with risk, capital structure, acquisitions, and options. Application of theory to practical applications will be stressed in the lectures.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: instructors of some sections may require a previous course in financial accounting. 

class: NCCY 5010
class title: Data Analytics and Modeling
description: This course will expose you to data analysis and modeling techniques for understanding business situations and improving business decisions under uncertainty. Specific topics are probability, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, regression, machine learning, simulation, data visualization, decision analysis, and practical applications.

class: NCCY 5080
class title: Operations Management
description: Operations Management is the study of the activities involved in bringing products and services to customers—the study of sourcing, production, retail, delivery, service and disposal activities. In this course, you will learn to use the science of operations management to 1) improve the efficiency of these activities in existing ventures, and 2) more importantly, to identify new, innovative ways of designing these value creating activities (aka business model innovation).

class: NEPAL 1121
class title: Elementary Nepali I
description: This course is intended for beginners of the Nepali language. The course aims to develop basic Nepali language functions. The emphasis is on basic grammar structures, and four basic skills of language learning: speaking, listening, reading, and writing, using culturally up-to-date materials and texts. Devanagari script for reading and writing is also introduced. No previous knowledge of Nepali is required to enroll this course.

class: NEPAL 2201
class title: Intermediate Nepali Conversation I
description: Intermediate instruction in spoken grammar and verbal comprehension skills, with special attention to developing technical vocabularies and other verbal skills appropriate to students' professional fields.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NEPAL 1102 or examination.

class: NEPAL 2203
class title: Intermediate Nepali Composition I
description: Systematic review of written grammar and reading comprehension, with special attention to the technical vocabularies, necessary writing skills, and published materials typical of advanced students' professional fields.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NEPAL 2201 or NEPAL 2202 or permission of instructor.

class: NEPAL 3301
class title: Advanced Nepali I
description: Reading of advanced texts, together with advanced drill on the spoken language.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NEPAL 2203 or NEPAL 2204 or by examination.

class: NES 1602
class title: Great Discoveries in Greek and Roman Archaeology
description: This introductory course surveys the archaeology of the ancient Greek and Roman world. Each week, we will explore a different archaeological discovery that transformed scholars' understanding of the ancient world. From early excavations at sites such as Pompeii and Troy, to modern field projects across the Mediterranean, we will discover the rich cultures of ancient Greece and Rome while also exploring the history, methods, and major intellectual goals of archaeology.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: NES 1921
class title: FWS: Radical Love: The Mystical Traditions of Islam
description: The eleventh century Muslim poet Rumi called love "the water of life." While Islam today is often viewed through the lens of politics and violence, this class will provide an introduction to the mystical traditions of Islam with a particular focus on the importance of love.  Other themes will include mystical understandings of the body, the self, the natural world, sexuality, the role of music and art in becoming close to the divine, and more. We will be writing about many of these themes, and will read works of poetry and philosophy, passages from the Quran, and histories of mystical movements past and present. In doing so, we will be able to understand how mystical love operates not just as a metaphor, but a way of life. 
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: NES 2201
class title: Intermediate Urdu Reading and Writing I
description: This course is designed to develop competence in Urdu reading and writing for students with a first-year knowledge of Hindi and knowledge of Urdu script. The goal of this course is to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing abilities in Urdu. By the end of the course, students will have the ability to read articles, write short stories and translate Urdu writings. May be taken concurrently with Intermediate Hindi.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: URDU 1125 or permission of instructor.

class: NES 2488
class title: Israel: History, Culture, Society
description: This course is an introductory survey to various aspects of Israeli culture, society, and history. Through a close examination of various media (film, music, literature) as well as key events and social and political facts, students explore a range of phenomena related to Israeli social practices and its political system, alongside a chronological overview of changes in Israeli culture and society over time. Topics covered may include geography, immigration, demographics, inequality, Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Hebrew language, gender, literature, film, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 2522
class title: Drinking through the Ages: Intoxicating Beverages in Near Eastern and World History
description: This course examines the production and exchange of wine, beer, coffee and tea, and the social and ideological dynamics involved in their consumption. We start in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, and end with tea and coffee in the Arab and Ottoman worlds. Archaeological and textual evidence will be used throughout to show the centrality of drinking in daily, ritual and political life.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: NES 2599
class title: Medicine, Magic and Science in the Ancient Near East
description: This course explores the history of medicine and other sciences in the ancient Near East, broadly defined. In addition to medicine, the other scientific disciplines covered in this course include mathematics, astrology, astronomy, alchemy, zoology, among others. Geographically, the course traces the transmission of scientific knowledge in ancient Babylonia, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, and beyond. As such, the course offers students a tour of different ancient civilizations and corpora. Students read selections from cuneiform Akkadian tablets, Egyptian Christian Coptic spellbooks, rabbinic sources such as the Talmud, among many other works. At the same time, students will be required to critically engage recent scholarship in the history of science and medicine as a way to help frame their analyses of the ancient materials. The course interrogates how ancient civilizations transmitted and received scientific knowledge, as well as the relationship between what we today tend to call science, medicine, magic, and religion. This course is intended not only for students in the Humanities and Social Sciences, but also for those majoring in science or medicine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: NES 2627
class title: Introduction to Islam
description: This course is an introduction to the study of Islam and Islamic history. Organised historically, the lecture series will begin with the career of the Prophet Muhammad, before charting the course of the Islamic Conquests, the establishment, zenith and collapse of various Islamic Empires, ending with European colonialism. Along the way, this geopolitical and historical overview will provide a backdrop to our exploration of changes and developments in Islamic thought and practice. In particular, we will focus on the emergence of the Sunni-Shi'i conflict, the rise of Sufism and Salafism, as well as how scholars across time and space thought and wrote about questions of ideal Islamic governance, the religious authority of the caliph, women's role in society and public space, slavery, the ethics of living under non-Muslim rule and the place of non-Muslims in Islamic society.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: NES 2674
class title: History of the Modern Middle East
description: This course examines major trends in the evolution of the Middle East in the modern era. Focusing on the 19th and 20th centuries and ending with the "Arab Spring," we will consider Middle East history with an emphasis on five themes: imperialism, nationalism, modernization, Islam, and revolution. Readings will be supplemented with translated primary sources, which will form the backbone of class discussions.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: NES 2697
class title: History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
description: This course examines the history of the conflict between two peoples with claims to the same land (Palestine/Israel), from the rise of their national movements at the turn of the 20th century and their eventual clash down to the present crisis. We will investigate the various stable and shifting elements in the evolution of the conflict including conflicting Israeli and Palestinian narratives and mythologies about the nature of the conflict. Among many issues to be addressed are: the relationship of this conflict to the history of European colonialism in the Middle East, the emergence of Pan-Arabism and Islamism, the various currents in Zionism and its relationship to Judaism, the implication of great power rivalry in the Middle East, the different causes and political repercussions of the four Arab-Israeli wars, efforts at peacemaking including Oslo and Camp David, and the significance of the two Palestinian uprisings.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: NES 2724
class title: The Jewish Bible-Old Testament in Context
description: The Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) is a repository of ancient Israelite religious, political, social, historical, and literary traditions. For the modern reader these ancient traditions are often obscured by a focus on the text as revelation. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the biblical world by reading the Hebrew Bible in translation, on its own terms, as a body of literature that evolved in an ancient Near Eastern context. The Bible itself will be the primary text for the course, but students will also be exposed to the rich and diverse textual traditions of the ancient Near East, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, Moab, and Ugarit. In addition, this course will explore the impact of early biblical interpretation on shaping the monotheistic traditions inherited in the West. As participants in a secular course on the Bible, students will be challenged to question certain cultural assumptions about the composition and authorship of the Bible, and will be expected to differentiate between a text's content and its presumed meaning.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 2754
class title: Wondrous Literatures of the Near East
description: This course examines Near East's rich and diverse literary heritage. We will read a selection of influential and wondrous texts from ancient to modern times, spanning geographically from the Iberian peninsula to Iran. We will explore a range of ancient myths of creation and destruction. We will also trace encounters with otherness in travel narratives. Together we will read and discuss such ancient works as the "The Story of Sinuhe" and "The Epic of Gilgamesh," as well as selections from the Hebrew Bible, New Testament and Qur'an. We will explore medieval works such as the "Travels" of Ibn Battuta, the "Shahnameh" of Ferdowsi, and "The Arabian Nights." We will also read Orhan Pamuk's My Name is Red, and Sonia Nimr's Wondrous Journeys in Strange Lands, as well as excerpts from Yochi Brandes's The Orchard. Students will also have the opportunity to research and analyze primary source materials in the collections of Cornell Rare Books and Manuscript Collection, and the Johnson Art Museum. All material is in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 3204
class title: Heritage Forensics
description: This course provides students with an orientation to the new technologies reshaping the effort to preserve cultural heritage. The course introduces students to the tools that Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing (especially aerial and satellite imaging) provide for advancing heritage preservation and detecting cultural erasure. Our focus will be on contexts where heritage has emerged as a site of conflict, from Bosnia to Syria to Ukraine. Students will develop proficiency in a range of spatial technologies and their application to the human past. The course will culminate in projects that use new technologies to save heritage at risk. 
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: NES 3325
class title: Literary Reading and Writing in Advanced Urdu
description: Designed for those students who have either taken Intermediate Urdu or are at the same level of competency in reading and writing skills. The goals of this class are to improve Urdu literary reading and writing abilities, primarily through reading various forms of Urdu prose. In addition, students learn about various genres of Urdu poetry and watch video clips and lectures that enhance listening and speaking abilities as well as the understanding and appreciation of Urdu culture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: intermediate Urdu or same level of written and oral proficiency.

class: NES 3411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 3539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: NES 3686
class title: Feminism and Islam in North Africa
description: The course is a survey of Feminist Islamic thinkers from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, and their diaspora, featuring both French and Arabic texts in English translation. The purpose of the course is to critically explore the competing treatment of major gendered tropes in a Muslim context (the veil, the harem, polygamy, etc.) by North African thinkers, through their examination of qur'anic surats/hadiths, the evolution of tafsirs (tradion of qur'anic exegesis) as well as their conflicting approaches to secular western feminism. Readings might include: Fatema Mernissi, Asmaa Lamrabet, Qasim Amin, Naguib Mahfoud, Assia Djebar, Mona Eltahawy, and Nawal El-Saadawi.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 3720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground.  We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 3787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 3880
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective?  Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: NES 4196
class title: From the Bible to the Museum: Jewish Memory and Public History
description: How has the remembrance of the past shaped the evolution of Jewish religion, identity, and culture from Biblical times to the present? How have the creation, dissemination, and preservation of Jewish memory changed over time? How is Jewish history used in political discourse in contemporary society in the U.S. and around the Globe? How can the historical tools be utilized to generate a sophisticated and discerning public engagement with the complexities of the Jewish past? In this course, students will explore these questions through seminar discussions, attending, evaluating, and critiquing exhibits and cultural events and watching films that put Jewish history on display, and by deploying their own research, writing, and creative skills to produce public facing final projects or a traditional research paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 4584
class title: Bordering Humanity: Race and Migration in the Modern Middle East and North Africa
description: This course is an historical introduction to the study of borders, race, and migration in the modern Middle East and North Africa. We will explore the fundamental migration events that have shaped the Middle Eastern and North African history, including global settler movements, enslavement and forced migration, partitions and population transfers, and contemporary refugee crises. We will discuss how race and migration shaped successive border regimes and competing world orders from the 19th century to the present. Analyzing a diverse array of primary sources from legal texts and maps to poetry and literature, we will pursue answers to questions such as: What are the legal, social, and political structures which govern international migration? What laws, ideas, and affects construct political borders? What happens to those who breach them? How do the legacies of racial slavery, settler colonialism, and ethno-nationalism unsettle the borders of contemporary Middle East and North Africa?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: NES 4672
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: NES 4991
class title: Independent Study, Undergraduate Level
description: For undergraduates who wish to obtain research experience or do extensive reading on a special topic. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course. For undergraduates who wish to obtain research experience or do extensive reading on a special topic. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course.

class: NES 4998
class title: Senior Honors Essay
description: Each fall, a small number of highly qualified seniors enter the Near Eastern Studies Honors Program. The Honors Program is open to NES majors who have done superior work and who wish to devote a substantial part of their senior year to advanced, specialized, independent research and writing of a thesis. Successfully completing an honors thesis will require sustained interest, exceptional ability, diligence, and enthusiasm. Students must also take two honors courses NES 4998 in fall and NES 4999 in spring, in addition to the regular major requirements. While admission to the Honors Program and completion of a thesis do not guarantee that students will be awarded honors in Near Eastern Studies, most students find the experience as intellectually rewarding as it is rigorous.

class: NES 4999
class title: Senior Honors Essay
description: Each fall, a small number of highly qualified seniors enter the Near Eastern Studies Honors Program. The Honors Program is open to NES majors who have done superior work and who wish to devote a substantial part of their senior year to advanced, specialized, independent research and writing of a thesis.  Successfully completing an honors thesis will require sustained interest, exceptional ability, diligence, and enthusiasm. Students must also take two honors courses NES 4998 in fall and NES 4999 in spring, in addition to the regular major requirements. While admission to the Honors Program and completion of a thesis do not guarantee that students will be awarded honors in Near Eastern Studies, most students find the experience as intellectually rewarding as it is rigorous.

class: NES 6411
class title: Jewish Family and Marriage Law
description: Through the centuries, Rabbinic Judaism developed an elaborate set of rules for governing marriage and family life, grounded in the Hebrew Bible and adapted to the realities of life in diaspora. This complex and sophisticated system helps to explain the continuity of Jewish collective identity in the sustained absence of a shared territorial homeland. We will study together part of the Talmudic tractate Yevamot (concerning the Levirate marriage) and relevant passages from the code known as Shulchan Aruch, along with scholarship in English. Some reading knowledge of Rabbinic Hebrew-Aramaic required.

class: NES 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: NES 6584
class title: Bordering Humanity: Race and Migration in the Modern Middle East and North Africa
description: This course is an historical introduction to the study of borders, race, and migration in the modern Middle East and North Africa. We will explore the fundamental migration events that have shaped the Middle Eastern and North African history, including global settler movements, enslavement and forced migration, partitions and population transfers, and contemporary refugee crises. We will discuss how race and migration shaped successive border regimes and competing world orders from the 19th century to the present. Analyzing a diverse array of primary sources from legal texts and maps to poetry and literature, we will pursue answers to questions such as: What are the legal, social, and political structures which govern international migration? What laws, ideas, and affects construct political borders? What happens to those who breach them? How do the legacies of racial slavery, settler colonialism, and ethno-nationalism unsettle the borders of contemporary Middle East and North Africa?

class: NES 6672
class title: Nationalism(s) in the Arab World
description: This seminar examines the emergence of national identities, nationalist movements, and nation-states in the modern Arab world. First, we will examine various approaches to the question of nationalism, using Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities as our basic reference. We will then test the applicability of these general theories to the Arab World through our examination of specific case studies.

class: NES 6720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground. We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender. 

class: NES 6722
class title: Graduate Colloquium
description: A series of lectures on a range of themes in the discipline sponsored by the Department of Near Eastern Studies. Presentations include lectures by invited speakers and works in progress presented by faculty and graduate students.

class: NES 6787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.

class: NES 6880
class title: Islam and the Ethnographic Imagination
description: How does one study Islam from an anthropological perspective? Through close readings of recent ethnographies, canonical texts, theoretical works, and critiques of the genre, we will understand the major debates and intellectual trends that have defined the anthropology of Islam from its earliest inception through the present day. Geographic areas covered include South Asia, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, America, North Africa, and West Africa.

class: NES 6991
class title: Independent Study: Graduate Level
description: For graduate students who wish to do intensive reading on a focused topic. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member that has agreed to supervise the course.

class: NMI 5040
class title: Johnson Leadership Fellows
description: This class teaches advanced leadership and coaching skills to Johnson Leadership Fellows as they, in their role as JLFs, guide first-year Core teams.  Through this course, JLFs will develop skills for team coaching as well as hone personal leadership skills, influencing, effective feedback, listening, conflict resolution, and individual and team resilience skills.  In addition the course serves as a confidential forum in which to process specific challenges that arise in the Core teams that the JLFs are coaching.

class: NMI 5090
class title: Big Red MicroEnterprise
description: Big Red Microenterprise (BRM) is a student-managed, experiential learning opportunity overseen by the Center for Sustainable Global Enterprise where graduate student coaches work with promising, but underserved, entrepreneurs in the local community to support inclusive wealth creation and economic development. Launched in 2009, BRM is a unique program which allows students to develop critical general management skills through engagement of real local companies that face acute operational and financial challenges which cut across all business functions. NOTE: BRM managers earn 3 credits per term; BRM coaches earn .5 credits per term.

class: NRE 5040
class title: PhD Seminar in Accounting
description: Accounting and finance are inextricably intertwined. For example, key roles for corporate financial reporting include assisting firms in raising debt and equity capital, improving the efficiency of the capital markets, and facilitating the effective monitoring of corporate managers' investing and financing decisions. This seminar provides a rigorous and integrative exposure to research that addresses economic issues of interest to both the accounting and finance research communities. Topics may include; an introduction to research methods, capital markets research in accounting, and experimental research in accounting.

class: NRE 5110
class title: PhD Seminar in Empirical Corporate Finance
description: This is a thorough doctoral level class on corporate finance, covering modern theoretical and empirical work, with an emphasis on the latter category. The course is designed to help students understand how to operationalize empirical research on topics that are central to corporate finance, such as capital structure, product market behavior, the limits of the firm, financial constraints, investment behavior, liquidity management, and more. The course will also look at the interface between corporate finance and other research areas, such as banking and industrial organization. The overarching goal is to expose students to "state-of-the-art" research in the field corporate finance and prepare them to conduct their own work using new methods and tools.

class: NRE 5150
class title: PhD Seminar in Behavior Marketing
description: In this special topics course, we will delve into several literatures involving the self and the buying, consuming, or producing of products and services. Some topics we will touch upon are Belk's concept of products as extended self, consumption and social status, dehumanization and objectification of consumers and producers, identity salience, moral identity, the influence of advertising and social media on consumer self-esteem, the influence of self-esteem on consumer behavior, gender relationships in consumer households, and the self in one's native versus a non-native language. In addition to the content of the articles and as opportunities arise, time discussing methodological and general research issues, such as how to triage ideas, how to do ethical and replicable research, and other topics related to becoming a productive experimental researcher. During this course, we will discuss a number of articles. Some articles will be chosen by the instructor. Others will be selected by the students. Students will be assigned to lead the discussion of specific papers.

class: NRE 5170
class title: PhD Seminar in Micro Organizational Behavior
description: This research-based graduate seminar involves a critical review of theory and research in Micro- and Meso-Organizational Behavior – research related to individual and group behavior in an organizational context. We will read both classic and current articles in the field, and students will be responsible for helping to shape the reading list and guide the class discussions. Due to the nature of the class it is critical that all students read the assigned materials before class and be prepared to contribute to a lively intellectual discussion about the work.  Upon completion of this course, students should be able to:  1) Discuss  and critique theory and research in major topic areas of Organizational Behavior, 2) integrate material within and across topics, and 3) propose new research questions that will extend management scholarship. 

class: NRE 5220
class title: Doctoral Seminar in Quantitative Models
description: This sequence of two half-semester courses is designed to introduce students to the key questions and quantitative models and estimation methods commonly used in marketing. 

class: NRE 5270
class title: Doctoral Seminar - International Finance
description: Research seminar for PhD students stressing current and classic research articles.

class: NRE 5280
class title: PhD Seminar in Empirical Asset Pricing
description: Johnson PhD Seminar-Content changes regularly.

class: NRE 5420
class title: PhD Seminar in Strategy
description: PhD Seminar-content changes regularly. 

class: NRE 5460
class title: Data Analytics in OM
description: This course will focus on methods of descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics that are being applied in operations management. Some of the research in this area is theoretical, such as on dynamic assortment optimization. Other research is based on machine learning to apply text analysis, feature detection, and community learning methods to large-scale prediction and optimization problems in OM. The course will combine both these types of approaches.

class: NS 1150
class title: Nutrition, Health, and Society
description: Introduction to Human Nutrition, Health, and Society provides fundamental knowledge for majors and non-majors in nutrition. The role of nutrition in health promotion and disease prevention is introduced from biological, social, and structural perspectives.
outcome: Identify the role of key nutrients, foods, and dietary patterns in health, disease prevention and therapeutic approaches., Describe complex systems of interactions of nutrition with genetic, behavioral, social, and structural factors., Explain the development and progression of nutrition guidance for individuals and populations., Demonstrate fundamental skills in the interpretation of the nutrition literature and explain differences in quality of evidence., 
distribution categories: (PBS-HE) (OPHLS-AG)

class: NS 1400
class title: Introduction to Human Biology, Health, and Society
description: Introduction to Human Biology, Health, and Society is intended for first-year Human Biology, Health, and Society (HBHS) majors. The course provides a foundational framework for the major as well as an introduction to disciplines involved in understanding, integrating, and improving human health from biological, behavioral, environmental, and public policy perspectives. Students will have the opportunity to explore these sub-disciplines and develop interests that will guide their future course choices as well as develop critical thinking skills, the ability to work in groups, communicate, reflect on social and cultural perceptions, and critically read scientific literature.
outcome: Contrast pathogenic mechanisms that underlie a variety of human diseases and understand their implications for clinical presentation and management., Examine the social, behavioral, and environmental context of lifestyle factors contributing to human disease, and implications for health equity., Analyze approaches to disease prevention from diverse perspectives, including public health, epidemiology, and economics., Integrate biological, behavioral, environmental, and economic perspectives to critically evaluate human health., Demonstrate critical thinking and collaborative skills to communicate the biological, behavioral, environmental, and economic impacts on human health., 

class: NS 1600
class title: Introduction to Public Health
description: Introduction to Public Health is intended for Global and Public Health Sciences majors and for other students majoring in related disciplines. The course provides the basic principles, practices, and policies of public health, including an introduction to the infrastructure and organization of public health; methods of data collection and surveillance; disease promotion and prevention; health disparities; the achievements, challenges, and controversies in the field; and the range of career opportunities available in the field. This course has a particular focus on public health assessment, policy development, and assurance in the United States.
outcome: Articulate basic public health functions of assessment, policy development, and assurance., Describe major public health achievements, challenges, and controversies., Identify major epidemiological study designs and compare their attributes and limitations for answering different public health questions., Describe the differences and commonalities between public health approaches to health prevention versus an individual-level medical approach to health., Describe the organization of the US healthcare system., Summarize the major steps involved in designing, implementing, and evaluating a public health program., Give examples of career opportunities in public health., Assess the impact of a public policy position on nutrition and dietetics practice. (Satisfies DPD learning outcome KRDN 2.3), Discuss the impact of health care policy and different health care delivery systems on food and nutrition services. (Satisfies DPD learning outcome KRDN 2.4), 
distribution categories: (D-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: NS 2060
class title: Preparation for Engaged Learning in Global and Public Health Sciences
description: This course provides foundational knowledge about community-engaged and experiential learning as it relates to global and public health and creates a dynamic classroom environment and community of learners to develop the essential orientations and skills required for success in the experiential learning and future careers in global and public health. 
outcome: Describe the concepts, rationales, expectations, and ethics of community-engaged and experiential learning as they relate to global and public health., Demonstrate familiarity with the available experiential opportunities for GPHS majors and the associated expectations, requirements, and learning objectives., Appreciate the value of a professional, reflexive, culturally-sensitive, and civic-minded orientation to their proposed community engagement., Appreciate the value of effective and appropriate inter-personal skills for managing diverse situations that arise in community and organizational settings related to global and public health., Have the ability to identify and critically analyze ethical dilemmas in global and public health research and practice., Appreciate the value of practicing regular reflection as part of responsible professional practice., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NS 1600, NS 2600.

class: NS 2061
class title: Site-Specific Preparation for Engaged Learning in Global and Public Health Sciences
description: This course provides pre-engagement preparation tailored to the research project or site where students will complete the experiential learning required for the GPHS major. Students will meet with the faculty member in charge, at a time and place to be arranged.
outcome: Can describe the overall purposes, methods, strategies, and/or activities of the project or organization with which they will work., Can describe the roles and responsibilities they will have in their chosen project or organization., Have formulated their personal learning objectives and a plan for documenting their achievement during and after the experience., Are aware of any relevant administrative, health, safety, IRB, logistical, social, cultural, technical or other requirements associated with their experiential project or site and have assumed full responsibility for meeting these requirements., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NS 1600, NS 2060, NS 2600.

class: NS 2450
class title: Social Science Perspectives on Food and Nutrition
description: Uses theories, concepts, and methods from the social sciences to examine food, eating, and nutrition. The food choice process model is used as a framework to examine the scope of social science aspects of nutrition. Assignments include examinations, short homework papers, and two research projects, one qualitative and one quantitative, for which students prepare proposals, collect and interpret data, and write reports.
outcome: Explain how social science concepts and theories apply to food and nutrition issues and explain individual, social, cultural, economic, and historical patterns of food, eating, and nutrition., Describe basic social facts about food, eating, and nutrition., Demonstrate basic principles and procedures for conducting qualitative and quantitative research to understand food choice, including protecting human participants in research., Demonstrate sensitivity and appreciation of individual, social, cultural, economic, and historical variations in food, eating, and nutrition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must have taken another NS course prior to requesting enrollment.

class: NS 2470
class title: Food for Contemporary Living
description: During this laboratory course, the understanding of food ingredients and techniques of food preparation is applied to positive nutritional practices and health promotion goals; basic food science and nutrition principles, food safety/sanitation, sensory evaluation, and social-cultural influences on food choices; food preparation, recipe modification, sensory evaluation (taste testing required); basic cooking skills, techniques. Introduction to basic menu planning and meeting nutritional requirements while restricted to a budget. Lab performance and a lab practical factored into final student evaluation; attendance at all labs is expected.
outcome: Students demonstrate the ability to modify, prepare and evaluate recipes., Students are able to apply knowledge of food composition, dietary standards, and science principles to modify recipes and menus for individual needs and preferences., Students are able to demonstrate effective and professional oral and written communication and documentation and use of current information technologies when communicating with individuals, groups and the public., Students are able to use current technologies to locate and apply evidence-based guidelines and protocols., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: NS 1150 or NS 1220.

class: NS 3090
class title: Global Health Case Studies from Weill Cornell Medicine
description: Weill Cornell Medicine faculty from several clinical departments including the department of medicine, department of surgery, department of anesthesiology, department of pediatrics, department of psychiatry, department of radiation oncology, department of public health, and department of emergency medicine, share their experiences in global health and international work. These global health experts will present their experiences abroad in a seminar style course.
outcome: Students will be able to: Describe discrete, short-term interventions in global health including medical mission style surgery and anesthesia services and emergency responses to humanitarian and natural disasters, such as the COVID-19, Ebola, or Zika outbreaks, the Haitian Earthquake, and the Syrian Refugee Crisis., Students will be able to: Describe the sustainable nature of existing global health initiatives such as Physicians for Human Rights work, cervical cancer screening, and long-term research collaborations in low- and middle-income countries through an understanding of the biosocial factors that impact health like poverty and economics, gender violence, and access to natural resources., Students will be able to: Compare and contrast the differences between traditional medical mission style work abroad and a biosocial approach to global health., 

class: NS 3200
class title: Introduction to Human Biochemistry
description: Presents the principles of biochemistry within the context of human health and disease. Teaches the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins from a perspective that emphasizes their role in supporting the structure and physiological functions of the major organs of the body. Incorporates the concepts of enzyme catalysis, enzyme regulation, hormone action, and bioenergetics within this framework. Covers he fundamental concepts of eukaryotic DNA structure, function, and gene expression with reference to their importance in regulating metabolism.
outcome: Predict the impact of gene regulation and protein regulation on metabolism and physiology at the cell, system and whole body level., Predict the impact of vitamins and minerals on metabolism and physiology at the cell, system and whole body level., Integrate knowledge of the interactions of gene regulation, protein regulation and nutrient availability on homeostasis., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year college biology, one year college general chemistry, and CHEM 1570 or CHEM 3570 or permission of instructor.

class: NS 3320
class title: Methods in Nutritional Sciences
description: Laboratory introduction to principles and analytical techniques of nutritional research. Emphasizes analytical concepts and skills required to determine nutrient function and nutritional status of individuals and populations. Topics include methods of nutrient, metabolite, and enzyme analysis in body fluids; methods for assessing individual food intake and nutritional status; methods for assessing body composition and energy expenditure; and methods for assessing the composition of foods.
outcome: Demonstrate knowledge of the fundamental theory and practice of common quantitative and qualitative methodologies used in nutrition and clinical research., Demonstrate an understanding of measurement error and its assessment., Demonstrate the ability to effectively interpret, report, and communicate experimental data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate biochemistry, NS 3450, NS 3310 preferred, or (where possible) concurrent registration.

class: NS 3450
class title: Introduction to Physiochemical and Biological Aspects of Foods
description: Comprehensive introduction to the physical, chemical, and nutritional properties of foods and to the principles and practice of food science and technology. Topics include chemistry and functionality of commodities and ingredients, chemical, physical and biological phenomena that affect food quality, techniques of processing and preservation, microbiology and fermentation, food safety, regulation, and contemporary issues.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to define parameters that collectively determine the quality of foods, and describe the chemical, biochemical, and biological phenomena that impact quality parameters., Demonstrate the ability to link the functionality of food ingredients with their chemical and physical, nutritional, and biological characteristics in the context of specific foods or categories of foods., Identify and describe the physicochemical and biological phenomena that underlie the major methods of food preservation, and recognize foods whose quality is extended by the use of such methods., Demonstrate the ability to independently locate authoritative information on food regulation and composition, and on contemporary issues of national and international importance using federal web-based resources., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college-level courses in general chemistry and biology; organic chemistry or concurrent registration.

class: NS 3980
class title: Research in Human Nutrition and Health
description: Provides an introduction to a range of topics and skills related to engaging in research in the fields of human health and nutrition, including constructing research questions, searching and assessing available literature, considering ethical implications of research with humans and animals, working with scientific data, and communicating scientific work. Some weekly sessions feature expert guest speakers from around campus, and the course includes several workshop sessions designed to give students practical experience in important research-related skills. NS 3980 is a required component of the DNS Honors Program, but non-DNS majors may enroll, and DNS majors may enroll whether or not they are interested in applying to the DNS Honors Program.
outcome: Describe the processes, requirements, and general timeline for the DNS Honors Research Program., Describe basic key information related to professional research in human and animal research, such as the structure of scientific literature, strategies for effective literature searches, key ethical considerations in research using human participants and animal subjects, introductory methods for data analysis, and basic essential components of scientific communication., Describe the practical relevance of course content to a student's own research and understand the next steps to applying this content., Describe areas of research in human health and nutrition, including research activities in DNS., 

class: NS 4000
class title: Directed Readings
description: Study that predominantly involves library research and independent reading.

class: NS 4010
class title: Empirical Research
description: Study that predominantly involves data collection and analysis or laboratory or studio projects.

class: NS 4020
class title: Supervised Fieldwork
description: Study that involves both responsible participation in a community setting and reflection on that experience through discussion, reading, and writing. Academic credit is awarded for this integration of theory and practice.

class: NS 4030
class title: Teaching Apprenticeship
description: Study that includes assisting faculty with instruction.

class: NS 4060
class title: Experiential Learning in Global and Public Health Sciences
description: Formalized active learning opportunity for students in the Global and Public Health Sciences major to develop and apply academic knowledge, principles and skills to a public health problem in a supervised community or research setting, either domestic or international.
outcome: Describe a public health issue through engagement in practice, policy, or research., Examine and explain the key characteristics and interests of host organization, hospital, institution, or research project, and how they relate to specific public health issue of student interest., Analyze a public health issue integrating academic knowledge and experiential learning., Document and explain how the applied experience advanced academic, professional, and personal learning goals., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NS 1600, NS 2600. Recommended: STSCI 2150, NS 3600.

class: NS 4410
class title: Nutrition and Disease
description: This course presents the role of nutrition in disease using review of the current literature and application to clinical cases. Students use their foundational knowledge in the sciences to understand the etiology and pathophysiology of disease states and learn where nutrition plays a critical role in the development, prevention, and/or management of disease. Application of knowledge to case studies is emphasized to develop skills in integrating nutrition into the assessment and management of acute illness and chronic medical conditions. The course prepares students to recognize the impact of nutrition in disease and apply this information personally and professionally in the areas of public health, community nutrition, clinical dietetics and clinical medicine.
outcome: Show a working knowledge of the etiology, pathophysiology, and progression of various disease states., Identify the role of specific nutrients, foods, and dietary patterns in the etiology and pathophysiology of various disease states., Explain the evidence-based nutrition recommendations and practice guidelines for specific diseases., Apply knowledge of pathophysiology and nutrition to health and disease states in the context of patient case studies., Communicate scientific information collaborate across differences (eg. cultural, social, personal, economic, physical, religious, learning styles and more) to evaluate patient cases., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NS 3200 or equivalent (can be taken concurrently). Recommended Prerequisites: NS 1150 or NS 1220; NS 3410 or NS 3420.

class: NS 4420
class title: Implementation of Nutrition Care
description: Develop skills necessary to implement nutrition care. Application of the nutrition care process as it applies to clinical settings is emphasized. Students develop skills to perform nutrition assessment, nutrition diagnosis, nutrition intervention, monitoring, and evaluation. Content includes principles of MNT for acute and chronic diseases, menu planning for disease states, the role of other allied health practitioners in assuring nutritional health, and reimbursement and legislation in dietetics practice.
outcome: 1.1:  Demonstrate how to locate, interpret, evaluate, and use professional literature to make ethical, evidence-based practice decisions., 1.2: Select and use appropriate current information technologies to locate and apply evidence-based guidelines and protocols., 1.3:  Apply critical thinking skills., 2.1: Demonstrate effective and professional oral and written communication and documentation., 2.2:  Describe the governance of nutrition and dietetics practice, such as the Scope of Nutrition and Dietetics Practice and the Code of Ethics for the Profession of Nutrition and Dietetics., 2.5:  Identify and describe the work of interprofessional teams and the roles of others with whom the registered dietitian nutritionist collaborates., 2.6:  Demonstrate cultural humility, awareness of personal biases, and an understanding of cultural differences as they contribute to diversity, equity and inclusion., 3.1:  Use the Nutrition Care Process and clinical workflow elements to assess nutritional parameters, diagnose nutrition related problems, determine appropriate nutrition interventions and develop plans to monitor the effectiveness of these interventions, 3.6  Develop nutritionally sound meals, menus, and meal plans that promote health and disease management and meet client's/patient's needs., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: NS 1220, NS 2470, NS 4410, or permission of instructor.

class: NS 4450
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: NS 4480
class title: Economics of Food and Malnutrition
description: This course focused on the economics of food and malnutrition from the perspective of individuals and households; that is, a micro-economic approach. Topics include characteristics and constraints associated with food production in both developed and developing countries; the determinants of household food security; the social and economic causes and consequences of undernutrition; the social and economic causes and consequences of obesity; intervention design to reduce food insecurity, undernutrition and obesity.
outcome: Ability to analyze problems of food security and nutrition using perspectives and tools drawn from both economics and nutrition; critically assess studies of the determinants of these; understand the strengths and limitations of interventions designed to ameliorate these., Integrate knowledge from the biological and social sciences to address nutrition problems facing individuals, societies and governments., Ability to understand and analyze quantitative data on food security and nutrition., Ability to access and critically evaluate scientific information from the primary research literature to investigate the causal effects of nutrition., Motivation to engage in debates surrounding the design and implementation of innovative solutions to current existing and future problems related to food, hunger, and nutrition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, AEM 2100, or equivalent, and 9 additional credits in economics, applied economics, or nutrition. Recommended prerequisite: ECON 3140, NS 3600, or equivalent.

class: NS 4570
class title: Health, Poverty, and Inequality: A Global Perspective
description: Course focuses on global health challenges, and how they are related to poverty and inequality.
outcome: Understand the nature and extent of global health challenges and inequalities in health at various levels, including across countries, at the national level, and even within the household, both current and historical., Understand possible policy responses to improving health and well-being and reducing observed disparities, differentiating the appropriate role of government and the private sector in crafting solutions to global health programs, including priority setting and resource allocation., Prepare convincing and policy relevant documents that outline major global health challenges, including their causes, magnitude (prevalence and incidence), and feasible opportunities to address these problems, taking into account the political and economic dimensions, as well as considerations such as the time frame, and positive and negative externalities, both anticipated and unanticipated., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory microeconomics and statistics or permission of instructor.

class: NS 4600
class title: Explorations in Global and Public Health
description: This capstone course provides guidance, conceptual tools, feedback and a dedicated space in the schedule for students to design, complete and communicate a capstone project on a topic of their choosing that allows them to demonstrate their mastery of the learning outcomes for the Global and Public Health Sciences major or Global Health minor.
outcome: Conduct an analysis of a global or public health issue that integrates multidisciplinary knowledge, contextual considerations, global or public health frameworks, current literature, community perspectives, normative considerations, an evaluation of alternatives for addressing the issue and critical reflection on your observational standpoint., Demonstrate the ability to communicate your analysis to a defined audience and recommend and defend your preferred alternative for addressing the issue., Demonstrate the capacity to appreciate and collaborate across differences, including cultural, social, personal, economic, values, religious and racial/ethnic differences., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of all requirements for Global and Public Health Sciences major, or Global Health minor, or permission of instructor.

class: NS 4990
class title: Honors Problem
description: All DNS Honors students must complete a total of six credits in NS 4990 Honors Problem. Students must complete three credits of NS 4990 in each of their last two semesters. These credits are supervised by the DNS Honors Program Director and represent both a student's research with their faculty advisor, as well as the program's required writing tasks, and presenting their project in a research symposium. Writing tasks include a progress report, abstract, literature review, full thesis draft, and final thesis. Research activities may include reviewing the literature, writing a proposal, developing research methods, collecting data in the field or laboratory, analyzing data, and writing the honors thesis. Additional research credit is taken as NS 4000, NS 4010, NS 4020, or equivalent.

class: NS 4997
class title: Experiential Learning in Global and Public Health in Washington, DC
description: This course centers on the student's global and public health internship in Washington DC to engage in an applied and holistic way with the global and public health policy world. Students will contribute to some work of their host organization and identify a particular global and public health policy issue they have encountered in their internship. They will analyze this issue in NS 4997 using guidance provided in their ePortfolios and they will do further analysis on it using complementary frameworks and perspectives gained from the policy and politics course - NS 4998.
outcome: Describe a public health issue through engagement in practice, policy, or research., Examine and explain the key characteristics and interests of their host organization, hospital, institution, or research project, and how they relate to public health issue they have described and analyzed., Analyze a public health issue integrating academic knowledge and experiential learning., Document and explain how the applied experience advanced academic, professional, and personal learning goals., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NS 1600, NS 2060, NS 2600.

class: NS 4998
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: GOVT 1111.

class: NS 5550
class title: Leadership in Dietetics Practice
description: Principles, theories and foundational skills of leadership are explored in the context of evidence-based dietetics practice through seminars, skill-building workshops, case-studies, role-playing scenarios and reflection on the application of leadership to practice. NS 5550 is a required course to fulfill Dietetic Internship competencies, as outlined in the Learning Outcomes, as well as learning outcomes for the Cornell Graduate School and Graduate Field of Nutrition.
outcome: (2.3): Demonstrate active participation, teamwork, and contributions in group settings., (2.7): Apply change management strategies to achieve desired outcomes., (2.8): Demonstrate negotiation skills., (5.1): Perform self-assessment that includes awareness in terms of learning and leadership styles and cultural orientation and develop goals for self-improvement., (5.2): Identify and articulate one's skills, strengths, knowledge, and experiences relevant to the position desired and career goals., (5.4): Advocate for opportunities in professional settings., (5.5): Demonstrate the ability to resolve conflict., (5.6): Promote team involvement and recognize the skills of each member., (5.7): Mentor others., Demonstrate ethical behaviors in accordance to the dietetics Professional Code of Ethics.

Outcome 11: Identify and apply leadership theories, philosophies, strategies and skills for effective leadership in diverse practice settings.

Outcome 12: Apply principles of organization management including strategic planning., 

class: NS 6000
class title: Special Problems for Graduate Students
description: Emphasizes independent advanced work. Experience in research laboratories in the Division of Nutritional Sciences may be arranged.

class: NS 6190
class title: Division of Nutritional Sciences Seminar
description: Lectures on current research in nutrition.

class: NS 6250
class title: Community Nutrition in Action
description: Provides students enrolled as dietetic interns with supervised, in-depth experiences in a community nutrition program and fosters the integration of research, theory, and practice. Through placements in community programs, students gain experience in program administration and in assessing, designing, implementing, and evaluating food and nutrition programs for targeted populations through public and private organizations. In weekly seminars (and other seminars and observations as arranged) students integrate theory and practice, reflect upon their placement experience, learn about community nutrition research, and explore the many issues facing community food and nutrition practitioners.
outcome: Identify indicators and measure outcomes appropriate for food and nutrition services and programs. CRDN 1.1: Select indicators of program quality and/or customer service and measure achievement of objectives. CRDN 1.3: Justify programs, products, services, and care using appropriate evidence or data., Apply evidence-based guidelines; conduct systematic reviews and scientific literature in the nutrition care process model and other areas of dietetics practice. CRDN 1.3: Justify programs, products, services, and care using appropriate evidence or data., Develop nutrition care plan for population groups across the lifespan, i.e., infants through geriatric and a diversity of people, cultures, and religions.CRDN 3.1: Perform the Nutrition Care Process and use standardized nutrition language for individuals, groups and populations of differing ages and health status, in a variety of settings., Develop and demonstrate effective communications skills using oral, print, visual, electronic, and mass media for community-based food and nutrition. CRDN 3.7: Demonstrate effective communication and documentation skills for clinical and client services in a variety of formats and settings, which include telehealth and other information technologies and digital media, Relate organizational processes and tools applied in human resource functions of community nutrition agencies. CRDN 4.1: Participate in management functions of human resources (such as training and scheduling). CRDN 4.8: Develop a plan to provide or develop a product, program or service that includes a budget, staffing needs, equipment and, supplies., Apply systems theory and a process approach in organizational decision–making, planning, and goal setting. CRDN 1.2: Evaluate research and apply evidence-based guidelines, systematic reviews, and scientific literature in nutrition and dietetics practice, Differentiate between public and private policies; processes involved in development and impact on public health, the food supply, food security, and community food systems. CRDN 2.1: Practice in compliance with current federal regulations and state statutes and rules, as applicable, and in accordance with accreditation standards and the Scope of Practice for the Registered Dietitian Nutritionist, Standards of Practice, Standards of Professional Performance, and Code of Ethics for the Profession of Nutrition and Dietetics., Design and supervise quality improvement, including systems and customer satisfaction, for community dietetics practice. CRDN 1.3: Justify programs, products, services, and care using appropriate evidence or data. CRDN 2.7: Apply change management strategies to achieve desired outcomes., Use current informatics technology to develop, store, retrieve and disseminate information and data. CRDN 4.4: Apply current informatics technology to develop, store, retrieve, and disseminate information and data., Think critically and critique the impact of food, nutrition, nutrition education, and the food system on public health. CRDN 1.5: Incorporate critical-thinking skills in overall practice., 

class: NS 6310
class title: Micronutrients: Function, Homeostasis, and Assessment
description: This course further expands on the material covered in introductory courses in nutritional biochemistry by providing a broad perspective of the function, homeostasis, and metabolism of the principal dietary micronutrients.
outcome: Understand the function and metabolism of selected vitamins and minerals., Describe aspects of homeostatic regulation and specific mechanisms of physiological control., Describe the scientific basis of micronutrient requirements and recommendations., Explain, evaluate, and effectively discuss claims, theories, and assumptions of micronutrients as presented in primary literature., Effectively communicate scientific arguments related to micronutrients, both in oral and written forms., 

class: NS 6350
class title: Introduction to Community Nutrition Research for Dietetic Interns
description: Introduces the paradigms, concepts, methods, and issues involved in community nutrition research. Students design and conduct individual research projects to inform community nutrition programs. Lectures, readings, and class discussion support students as they conduct their research activities.
outcome: Students will have an understanding of the total research process as it applies to community nutrition programs., Students will have an understanding of conceptual and operational aspects of research related to community nutrition., Students will have selected research skills., 

class: NS 6455
class title: Toward a Sustainable Global Food System: Food Policy for Developing Countries
description: Comprehensive presentation and discussion of policy options for a sustainable global food system, with focus on developing countries. Topics include: economic policy related to nutrition, health, consumption, production, natural resource management, trade, markets, gender roles, armed conflict, and ethics. A social entrepreneurship approach based on case studies and active participation by students will be used.
outcome: Ability to analyze a specific food and nutrition policy problem, identify the related policy issues, suggest one or more policy options to solve the problem, and estimate how each option would affect relevant stakeholder groups and their expected response., Ability to undertake the above with limited information and within a short time frame., Motivation to engage in the design and implementation of innovative solutions to existing and expected future problems related to the global, national and local food systems, i.e. to be a social or policy entrepreneur within or outside the public sector., Graduate students will be required to lead/mentor their case study group of undergraduate students and be provided with an opportunity to identify an area of future graduate research for his/her own thesis., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: NS 6480
class title: Economics of Food and Malnutrition
description: This course focused on the economics of food and malnutrition from the perspective of individuals and households; that is, a micro-economic approach. Topics include characteristics and constraints associated with food production in both developed and developing countries; the determinants of household food security; the social and economic causes and consequences of undernutrition; the social and economic causes and consequences of obesity; intervention design to reduce food insecurity, undernutrition and obesity.
outcome: Ability to analyze problems of food security and nutrition using perspectives and tools drawn from both economics and nutrition; critically assess studies of the determinants of these; understand the strengths and limitations of interventions designed to ameliorate these., Integrate knowledge from the biological and social sciences to address nutrition problems facing individuals, societies, and governments., Ability to understand and analyze quantitative data on food security and nutrition., Ability to access and critically evaluate scientific information from the primary research literature to investigate the causal effects of nutrition., Motivation to engage in debates surrounding the design and implementation of innovative solutions to current existing and future problems related to food, hunger, and nutrition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1110, AEM 2100, or equivalent, and 9 additional credits in economics, applied economics, or nutrition. Recommended prerequisite: ECON 3140, NS 3600, or equivalents.

class: NS 6980
class title: International Nutrition Seminar
description: Discussions and presentations by Cornell faculty, graduate students, and invited outside speakers representing a range of multisectoral perspectives on global nutrition. Topics and themes focus on research, policy, and programs related to nutrition in low- and middle-income countries.

class: NS 7030
class title: Seminar in Nutritional Sciences
description: This graduate nutrition course addresses the analytic and professional skills required to critique original research publications and make public presentations to a broad audience. Students critically analyze and interpret findings from research articles published in a wide variety of journals related to the field of nutritional sciences. Students present these critiques to a broad multi-disciplinary audience, and participate in the seminars presented by other students.

class: NS 8990
class title: Master's Thesis and Research
description: A course for Division of Nutritional Sciences (DNS) Graduate Students doing research related to completing their Master's degree.

class: NS 9990
class title: Doctoral Thesis and Research
description: A course for Division of Nutritional Sciences (DNS) Graduate Students doing research related to completing their Doctoral degree.

class: NTRES 1101
class title: Understanding Environment and Sustainability
description: This course examines two fundamental questions about biological, chemical and physical processes that influence the biosphere. First, how do humans obtain knowledge about these environmental processes? Second, how can we assess human influences upon these environmental processes? A key conceptual framework for the course is that environmental science provides tools for predicting future states of the earth's environment. Case studies, readings, discussions, writing assignments, and group exercises provide a foundation for understanding predictions about how the biosphere is influenced by human activities.
outcome: Identify and weigh sources of information about environmental resources, and use them to evaluate competing claims about sustainability and environmental management efforts., Explain how the earth's resources support ecosystems and humanity., Evaluate how cultural context and spatial scale influence environmental resource management options., Compare policies and societal norms that influence personal and collective resource use., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: NTRES 1111
class title: Roadmap to Success in Environment and Sustainability
description: This course is for first-year students entering or intending to enter the Environment &amp; Sustainability (E&amp;S) major. The multidisciplinarity of this major may make it seem complex. The purpose of this class is to position you for success with your goals in the major, at Cornell and beyond. Course content will facilitate your course planning, choice of concentration, and help you map out the resources and opportunities Cornell offers. Course activities will help you explore your personal identity and get to know your E&amp;S student cohort.
outcome: Develop a learning community and support network., Describe learning goals in the E&S core curriculum, E&S concentration, E&S capstone and Cornell electives; relate them to your career goals., Identify the resources and services at Cornell that can help you meet your academic and career goals., Engage in self-reflection about how you think and learn, how you interact with others, and how you respond to new information., Identify and acknowledge your social identity, cultural rules and biases and the inherent value of being open to diverse perspectives., 

class: NTRES 2100
class title: Introductory Field Biology
description: In this course, students are introduced to field identification, natural history, and study of plants, animals, and natural systems. This course emphasizes hands-on interaction with nature, recording of ecological phenomena, and awareness and understanding of the natural environment, including ecological concepts (e.g., ecosystem, community, habitat, and niches).   
outcome: Students will be able to identify and characterize ecosystem types, ecological communities, and habitats in the northeastern region based on key structural features, associated taxa, and the physical environment., Students will be able to identify approximately 200 common taxa of plants and animals in the northeastern region and will understand the natural history of those species and their relationship to the environment., Students will develop an understanding of field research methods and approaches in a variety of ecological disciplines., Students will be able to formulate research questions from field observations, develop a sample design, collect field data, and interpret and discuss their results in relation to research questions., Students will demonstrate equitable collaboration as they design, plan, execute and communicate the results of a field research project., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one introductory college biology course.

class: NTRES 2400
class title: Field Methods in Avian Ecology
description: Students will learn and practice a variety of methodologies used for studying wild birds including banding, census methods (point counts, transects, spot mapping), and behavioral observations. In a 50-minute classroom session each week, students will discuss relevant scientific literature and prepare for the lab session. The weekly field session will be held at various locations and students should be prepared to handle variable weather conditions. Students seeking to conduct independent research in avian ecology are encouraged to enroll. Note that one weekend field trip is required.
outcome: Recognize the birds of the Finger Lakes region by sight and sound., Develop an appreciation for the diversity of life-history strategies pursued by these birds., Perform a variety of field techniques used for studying birds including banding, census methods (point counts, transects, spot mapping), and behavioral observations., Record an appropriately detailed field journal., Develop and test ecological hypotheses through an independent project, to summarize and analyze data, and to present scientific information appropriately in both written and oral form., 

class: NTRES 3020
class title: Earth Projects
description: Taught by an artist and scientist, in this experiential, place-based field course, students will engage in a range of interdisciplinary practices to understand and interpret ecological systems and land use issues using artistic and scientific approaches. The core of this course will be based on weekend field trips to diverse sites in the Finger Lakes Region of New York with varied cultural and ecological significance. Sites include Cornell's Biological field station at Shackelton Point on Oneida Lake, Arnot Forest, and several art museums. Immersive stays will allow students to gain a deep understanding of place along with uninterrupted time to work on creative projects independently, in groups, and as a class. Students will gain an understanding of the history of creative interventions and performance in the landscape, as well as scientific approaches to engage with and conceptualize Earth's topography and natural phenomena. Students will have the opportunity to interact with various visiting scientists and artists who are leaders in their fields. Lectures, readings, fireside chats, critique, and interdisciplinary experiences will contribute to students' development. The final product of this class will be an art exhibition at the Soil Factory, an interdisciplinary art space in downtown Ithaca.
outcome: Interrelate field study, scientific research, cultural and artistic practices to deepen a sense of place., Design, conduct, and present site-specific research and artwork., Illustrate knowledge on a wide range of current topics in environmental studies while broadening aesthetic and sensorial capacities to respond to and bolster field-based scientific research., Name, describe and critique the work of a diversity of international artists and scientists who exemplify a holistic study of nature, sustainability, and humanities while learning about the strategies and critical concepts they employ in their work., Gain new perspectives to diversify approaches to students' discipline-specific problems., Use shop tools and/or software for the creation of artwork., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite:  At least one of the following: a studio art class or a college-level biology class or a visual studies class or an environment &amp; sustainability class or permission of instructor.

class: NTRES 3030
class title: Introduction to Biogeochemistry
description: Control and function of the Earth's global biogeochemical cycles. Begins with a review of the basic inorganic and organic chemistry of biologically significant elements, and then considers the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, nutrients, and metals that take place in soil, sediments, rivers, and the oceans. Topics include weathering, acid-base chemistry, biological redox processes, nutrient cycling and limitation, trace gas fluxes, bio-active metals, the use of isotopic tracers, controls on atmospheric carbon dioxide, and carbon cycle models. Interactions between global biogeochemical cycles and other components of the Earth system are discussed. Co-enrollment in one lab/discussion section per week is required.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2070 or equivalent, MATH 1120, and a course in biology and/or geology.

class: NTRES 3100
class title: Applied Population Ecology
description: In-depth analysis of the ecological factors influencing the natural fluctuation and regulation of animal population numbers. Develops models of single- and multi-species population dynamics, with emphasis on understanding the relationship between ecological processes operating at the individual level and subsequent dynamics at the population level. Significant emphasis is placed on application to conservation and management. Computer exercises are used to reinforce concepts presented in lecture.
outcome: Students will be able to analyze ecological systems in terms of proximate and ultimate causation, and be able to work with multi-level systems interactions., Students will be able to use basic conceptual and analytical tools for describing and quantifying ecological relationships., Students will be able to quantify mechanisms of resource acquisition, environmental tolerance, and system resilience and stability., Students will be able to understand and use fundamental analytical methods to describe structure and dynamics of populations and communities., Students will be able to make predictions about population and community dynamics based on their knowledge about biotic and abiotic factors influencing species interactions., Students will be able to integrate their knowledge about species interactions to explain higher level ecosystem processes., Students will be able to integrate conceptual and theoretical understanding in application to reach specified conservation management objectives., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Strongly recommended prerequisite: calculus (MATH 1106, MATH 1110 - AP calculus in high school is sufficient), background in Ecology or Biology. Preference given to E&amp;S majors.
 

class: NTRES 3150
class title: Introduction to Conservation Bioacoustics
description: This course provides a strong foundation in the discipline of conservation bioacoustics, the use of sound to assess biodiversity, monitor animal populations, and make conservation decisions. In lecture, students will learn the basics of how sound is recorded and visualized, how animals produce and perceive sounds, and how to select recording equipment that is appropriate to the question and application. The course lectures will also build skills in acoustic data analysis including manual annotation, template detection, and machine learning approaches. In lab, students will use recording equipment to make recordings, practice analyzing acoustic data using a variety of cutting-edge analysis approaches, and learn strategies for the curation and management of large datasets. This course is a mandatory pre-requisite for an optional marine and terrestrial field component that will take place in Hawaii. Additional information about the related trip will be provided in class.
outcome: Describe how digital audio is recorded and stored., Create visualizations of sound using the Raven Pro software., Identify conservation contexts that are compatible with passive acoustic monitoring., Select suitable recording equipment and settings for specific taxonomic groups and habitats., Select and implement analytical tools for finding and identifying sounds in long recordings., 

class: NTRES 3151
class title: Conservation Bioacoustics Field Course Preparation
description: This course will focus on preparing students for the winter term Hawai'i field course. Specifically, we will learn about Hawai'ian ecosystems, culture, and conservation needs, and ideate potential bioacoustic project ideas related to these topics. Students will also learn about field techniques and data management practices that will be essential during our field course. This course will include lectures from Yang Center instructors and our local collaborators, discussion of relevant literature, and group work to develop project ideas and create plans for data collection.
outcome: Apply theoretical and practical knowledge from NTRES 3150/6150., Describe the threats to Hawai'ian biodiversity and how passive acoustic monitoring
can support local conservation efforts., Design and plan research projects in Conservation Bioacoustics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NTRES 3150.

class: NTRES 3220
class title: Global Biodiversity
description: This course will explore the historical and ecological concepts underlying the planet's biological diversity. The goal is to develop an overview of what we know about patterns and processes of biological diversity in the past, present, and future. Pattern and process is the foundation to explore conservation and policy implications of changing biodiversity. Patterns include species richness, endemism, and extinction for plants and animals. Processes include climatic, ecological, geographic, and human induced changes. Recognizing the origin and maintenance of biological diversity is imperative in light of the tremendous increase in the human population size and the effects that humans have on life on Earth.
outcome: Describe the historical origins of biodiversity for major taxonomic groups, and how that biodiversity has been and is distributed across the Earth., Describe the ecological and biogeographic concepts that influence biodiversity., Investigate a topic of interest and explain the importance via research and writing., Predict the consequences of changing biodiversity and conservation strategies., Synthesize course content via writing and examination., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college-level biology and general ecology course.

class: NTRES 3311
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Environmental governance is defined as the assemblage of institutions that regulate society-nature interactions and shape environmental outcomes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. Institutions, broadly defined, are mechanisms of social coordination including laws (formal) and social norms (informal) that guide the behavior of individuals. Participants in the course will explore the roles of governments, markets, and collective action in environmental management and mismanagement. We will emphasize interactions among leading environmental policy strategies: public regulation, market-based incentives, and community-based resource management. The course is focused around a set of analytic perspectives. These theoretical frameworks allow us to synthesize empirical observations and material changes in ways that inform our understanding of contemporary evolution of environmental policy and management.
outcome: Students will gain familiarity with the concepts, theories, and applications of institutional analysis applied to environment., Students will develop critical awareness of the strengths and weakness of states, markets, and collective structures as resources for social regulation., Students will develop an historical appreciation of environmental policy in order to reflect critically on contemporary status and trends., Students will develop an interdisciplinary understanding of environmental policy through exploration of economic, sociological, and political scientific perspectives., Students will be exposed to a broad range of environmental problems and policy and management responses. Coverage includes national and international cases, and analyses at multiple scales., Students will develop capacity to conduct institutional analysis including the specification of a research question, policy research, synthesis, and communication., Students will build generic competencies including reading of scientific and popular texts, writing, oral communication, group work, and critical analysis., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: NTRES 3330
class title: Ways of Knowing: Indigenous and Place-Based Ecological Knowledge
description: Based on indigenous and place-based "ways of knowing," this course (1) presents a theoretical and humanistic framework from which to understand generation of ecological knowledge; (2) examines processes by which to engage indigenous and place-based knowledge of natural resources, the nonhuman environment, and human-environment interactions; and (3) reflects upon the relevance of this knowledge to climatic change, resource extraction, food sovereignty, medicinal plant biodiversity, and issues of sustainability and conservation. The fundamental premise of this course is that human beings are embedded in their ecological systems.
outcome: To appreciate natural resource development from a human ecological perspective., To apply the interdisciplinary lens of human ecology to understand human and environmental relations., To appreciate the complex interconnectivity between the ecological and the cultural., To comprehend that individual actions informed by cultural systems manifest themselves in social structures that rely on ecological foundations., To extend the notion of transdisciplinary to include indigenous and place-based knowledge., To situate indigenous and local knowledge within a humanistic framework of knowledge generation., To illustrate the participatory and experiential basis of indigenous and place-based knowledge., To propose a method best suited for researching such knowledge processes., To value the contributions of indigenous and place-based knowledge in the context of socio-cultural and environmental change and natural resource utilization., 
distribution categories: (CA-AG, D-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: NTRES 4100
class title: Advanced Conservation Biology: Concepts and Techniques
description: Decision making in conservation biology requires measurement and analysis of variation at various levels (individual, population, and landscape). Emphasis in this course is on quantitative tools for the formal analysis of variation at all three levels and principles guiding maintenance and management of biological diversity.
outcome: Students will be able to use conceptual and analytical tools to describe demographic and genetic factors influencing population persistence., Students will be able to quantify the relative importance of various demographic factors affecting population size projections., Students will be able to understand and use fundamental analytical methods to quantify genetic structure at the individual, population and metapopulation scale and infer demographic and evolutionary processes shaping patterns of variation., Students will be able to make predictions about population viability based on their knowledge about demographic and genetic factors influencing population size and mean population fitness., Students will be able to integrate conceptual and theoretical understanding to reach specified conservation management objectives., Students will be able to articulate in written and oral form their understanding of both the concepts and analytical tools, and the role of sources of uncertainty, in application to problems in conservation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CALS math requirement. Prerequisite or corequisite: NTRES 3100, NTRES 2830 or equivalents, or permission of instructor. 

class: NTRES 4160
class title: Conversations in Conservation for One Health
description: This is a seminar series on community conservation projects conducted through Engaged Cornell with partners in Indonesia (Ujung Kulon National Park and Alliance of Integrated Forest Conservation) and Africa (Jane Goodall Institute). Each meeting consists of a presentation, open to students and members of the community, given by a veterinary or undergraduate participant of the Engaged Learning Program and followed by a discussion with enrolled students. The course brings together faculty and student mentors with prospective students interested in conservation medicine, providing opportunities for dialogue on One Health projects from proposal and implementation to impact and reflection. Debriefing uses material from field portfolios and relevant literature to augment case-based sharing of unique conservation experiences at the wildlife-domestic animal interface, great ape-human interactions, and
environmental-public policy.
outcome: Students will provide others with knowledge and ideas that help form the foundation on which to find opportunities, further training, and build a career in the field of conservation., Students will foster critical thinking and interest in their home communities concerning their collective experiences in conservation., Students will promote a sensitivity to the needs of local hosting communities and to the ethical roles of the conservationist in society., Students will synthesize and communicate the diverse social, ecological, and health issues underpinning their field experiences., Students will evaluate the impact of their contributions, taking into account the various perspectives of stakeholders related to their field experiences., Students will respectfully articulate the cultural context of socioecological challenges related to their field experiences., Students will identify and apply the concepts and lessons learned in their field experiences to other global One Health challenges., Students will demonstrate how working as part of interdisciplinary teams is helpful for examining linkages and finding creative solutions in conservation., 

class: NTRES 4300
class title: Environmental Policy Processes I
description: This on-campus and off-campus course sequence focuses on how environmental policy issues move through the federal policy-making process. Students select an environmental policy topic during the fall semester session (NTRES 4300) for analysis during the second part of the course (NTRES 4301), which takes place in Washington, D.C. The second session continues course focus on contemporary environmental problems, how they are defined, aggregating interests, agenda-setting, formulating alternative solutions, implementation and evaluation, and roles of lobbyists, advocates, the legislative, executive, judicial branches of government, and other actors. DC activities also include organized meetings with policy makers, advocates and experts as guest panelists. The spring semester session (NTRES 4302) requires presenting an oral policy briefing and writing both short and long policy briefs based on the DC interviews and additional research.
outcome: Define what constitutes an environmental policy problem., Describe the stages of policymaking., Compare the ways that actors, institutions, and constraints interact to influence environmental policies., Analyze specific case studies of environmental policy problems and efforts to address them., Prepare and use notes from interviews with policymakers to summarize diverse perspectives regarding a contemporary environmental policy problem., Evaluate, synthesize, and contrast sources of information in preparing an objective environmental policy analysis., 

class: NTRES 4500
class title: Climate Solutions Capstone
description: Interested in working toward solutions to the climate crisis? In this course, you will choose and implement a climate action from Project Drawdown's (www.drawdown.org) list of 82 climate solutions. You will also apply social sciences research to influence your friends or family to implement your climate action alongside you. For the capstone team project, you will work with other students and a community partner (Cornell Cooperative Extension or Climate Action Now) to support education related to plant-rich diet, low-emissions agriculture, forest regeneration, or other climate solutions. Interested students should have a general understanding of climate change science.
outcome: Compare approaches to mitigating climate change and choose an individual climate mitigation action., Apply social sciences research to develop and implement an action plan to influence one of your social networks (e.g., friends, family, Instagram followers) to take that action alongside you., Create your own arguments for the responsibility of individuals, corporations, and the broader collective to foster climate and food justice., Collaborate professionally and equitably with community partners to develop educational materials related to sustainable food, agricultural, and forestry practices and policies., Communicate through a variety of media including writing, presentations, and apps. 6. Evaluate and respond to constructive peer feedback on discussion boards and during real-time online discussions., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: NTRES 4600
class title: Planning for Environmental Conservation and Sustainability
description: An interactive course designed to provide students with experience applying some of the most important techniques that are used to develop plans to protect and sustain valuable environmental resources, such as species, ecosystems, land, and water. The class focuses on highly charged controversies over conservation, and students learn how planning can help them to identify and address the full range of ecological and social factors that lead to conservation success in these contexts. Students adopt the roles of stakeholders and work on intensive case studies of conservation issues, learning how ecological and social insight are integrated for effective conservation planning. Topics covered in the course include: rational planning, adaptive management, stakeholder engagement, and conflict resolution.
outcome: Students will learn to define conservation issues, develop plans (including goals, objectives, strategies, and actions) to address those issues, and identify potential positive and negative consequences of these plans., Students will be able to recognize and describe the range of ecological and social factors that influence the success of conservation efforts., Students will be able to identify and describe the stages of the planning process and learn how to carry out the activities that occur during these stages., For specific current issues in environmental conservation, students will recognize key stakeholder groups and be able to describe: these stakeholders' interests and concerns, points of contention between different stakeholders, and possible strategies and actions for addressing these points of contention., Students will develop their written and oral communications skills., Students will develop their abilities to work individually and in groups., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: NTRES 4940
class title: Special Topics in Natural Resources
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the semester starts. Courses offered under the number will be approved by the department curriculum committee, and the same course is not offered more than twice under this number.

class: NTRES 4960
class title: Internship in Natural Resources
description: On-the-job learning experience under the supervision of professionals in a cooperating organization. A learning contract is written between the faculty supervisor and the student, stating the learning objectives, conditions of the work assignment, nature of on-the-job supervision, and reporting requirements, including the formal basis on which the faculty supervisor will assign a grade. All 4960 internship courses must adhere to the CALS guidelines at cals.cornell.edu/academics/student-research/internship.

class: NTRES 4961
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: NTRES 4970
class title: Individual Study in Environmental Social Science and Resource Policy
description: Individual study under faculty supervision. Topics in environmental social science resource policy are arranged depending on the interests of students and availability of staff.

class: NTRES 4971
class title: Individual Study in Applied Ecology and Conservation Ecology
description: Individual study under faculty supervision. Topics in applied ecology or conservation biology are arranged depending on the interests of students and availability of staff.

class: NTRES 4972
class title: Individual Study in Ecosystem Science and Biochemistry
description: Individual study under faculty supervision. Topics in ecosystem science and biogeochemistry are arranged depending on the interests of students and availability of staff.

class: NTRES 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching in Natural Resources
description: Designed to give students an opportunity to obtain teaching experience by assisting in labs, field trips for designated sections, discussions, and grading. Students gain insight into the organization, preparation, and execution of course plans through application and discussions with instructor.

class: NTRES 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research
description: Undergraduate research projects in natural resources; contingent on finding a faculty person to work with.

class: NTRES 5900
class title: Professional Projects - M.P.S.
description: For M.P.S. graduate students working on professional master's projects.

class: NTRES 6000
class title: Introduction to Graduate Study in Natural Resources
description: Students will attend weekly seminar in Natural Resources and engage in follow up discussion of the scientific content presented and implications for the management and conservation of resources. Additional goal of the course is to examine how scientists pursue career paths toward effective participation in this realm. Discussions focus on the practices of scientists and institutions that provide a framework for scientific endeavors.

class: NTRES 6040
class title: Seminar on Selected Topics in Resource Policy and Management
description: Special topics seminar on subjects related to resource policy and management.

class: NTRES 6100
class title: Collaborative and Reproducible Data Science in R
description: As datasets grow larger and more complex across all areas of science, computational skills are increasingly in high demand. This course introduces a series of practical tools that enable researchers to spend less time wrestling with software or repeating error-prone manual data processing and more time getting research done in efficient and transparent ways that facilitate collaboration and reproducibility. We will work in R/RStudio. Topics covered include 1) tidy data formatting, 2) rearrangement, filtering, exploration, and visualization of complex datasets, 3) basic programming, 4) version control with Git and GitHub, and 5) using R Markdown to combine text, code, tables, and figures into reports, websites, and presentations. The course emphasizes practical skill development and is structured around hands-on (the keyboard) learning.
outcome: Describe strategies for ensuring that their data analysis is reproducible., Demonstrate best practices for coding and project-oriented workflows in RStudio., Import and clean messy data files using a variety of packages and functions in R., Subset, reorganize, and merge diverse datasets in R., Effectively explore and visualize patterns in complex datasets with ggplot in R., Write simple functions/programs and data analysis pipelines in R., Automate repeated analysis tasks in R., Track the history of file changes (version control) and collaborate effectively on scripts with others with Git and GitHub., Use R Markdown to combine text, equations, code, tables, and figures into reports, websites, and presentations., 

class: NTRES 6150
class title: Introduction to Conservation Bioacoustics
description: This course provides a strong foundation in the discipline of conservation bioacoustics, the use of sound to assess biodiversity, monitor animal populations, and make conservation decisions. In lecture, students will learn the basics of how sound is recorded and visualized, how animals produce and perceive sounds, and how to select recording equipment that is appropriate to the question and application. The course lectures will also build skills in acoustic data analysis including manual annotation, template detection, and machine learning approaches. In lab, students will use recording equipment to make recordings, practice analyzing acoustic data using a variety of cutting-edge analysis approaches, and learn strategies for the curation and management of large datasets. This course is a mandatory pre-requisite for an optional marine and terrestrial field component that will take place in Hawaii. Additional information about the related trip will be provided in class.
outcome: Describe how digital audio is recorded and stored., Create visualizations of sound using the Raven Pro software., Identify conservation contexts that are compatible with passive acoustic monitoring., Select suitable recording equipment and settings for specific taxonomic groups and habitats., Select and implement analytical tools for finding and identifying sounds in long recordings., Graduate students will be able to: interpret and evaluate the potential of emerging analysis approaches., Graduate students will be able to: analyze and teach others about specific topics in sound analysis., 

class: NTRES 6151
class title: Conservation Bioacoustics Field Course Preparation
description: This course will focus on preparing students for the winter term Hawai'i field course. Specifically, we will learn about Hawai'ian ecosystems, culture, and conservation needs, and ideate potential bioacoustic project ideas related to these topics. Students will also learn about field techniques and data management practices that will be essential during our field course. This course will include lectures from Yang Center instructors and our local collaborators, discussion of relevant literature, and group work to develop project ideas and create plans for data collection.
outcome: Apply theoretical and practical knowledge from NTRES 3150/6150., Describe the threats to Hawai'ian biodiversity and how passive acoustic monitoring can support local conservation efforts., Design and plan research projects in Conservation Bioacoustics., Research, identify, and apply advanced statistical methods with acoustic data, including conducting preliminary analysis on mock datasets that match the structure of the data that the students propose to collect., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: NTRES 3150/NTRES 6150.

class: NTRES 6300
class title: Current Topics in Molecular Ecology and Population Genomics
description: This graduate seminar will take the form of a journal club that meets weekly to discuss the burgeoning literature on genomic approaches used to address ecological and evolutionary questions in non-model organisms (i.e. organisms that have not been selected by large research communities for extensive study). The class time is used for discussion of recent primary research articles. Paper topics will be determined based on student interest and will include both novel results and methodological advances, primarily in evolutionary and ecological genomics or molecular ecology. To earn course credit, students are required to actively participate in class discussions each week and lead the discussion of at least one paper over course of the semester.
outcome: Interpret and critique papers from the primary literature in the fields of molecular ecology and population genomics., Discuss examples of how cutting-edge genomic methodology can be applied to address ecological and evolutionary questions in non-model organisms., Articulate ideas and questions in a group discussion on shared readings., Lead a group discussion on shared readings., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory genetics plus a background in population or ecological genomics, or permission of instructor.

class: NTRES 6310
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Considers the question of environmental governance, defined as the assemblage of social institutions that regulate natural resource use and shape environmental outcomes. Participants explore the roles of public policy, market exchange, and collective action in resource (mis)management. Introduces theoretical concepts from a variety of social science perspectives to support case studies and student-led discussions. Comparative analysis of how governance is pursued in different countries, historical periods, and ecological contexts (forestry, endangered species, water quality) highlight scope for institutional innovation. Students taking the course for graduate credit are required to read supplemental materials, undertake more complex research assignments, and participate in seminar discussion section.
outcome: Describe the history and processes of environmental governance., Apply terms, concepts, and methods of critical institutional analysis to environmental governance., Take positions on classical and contemporary debates animating environmental policy processes., Apply knowledge to a specific question, concept, or problem selected for the term paper., Demonstrate content-specific oral and communication skills., 

class: NTRES 6330
class title: Ways of Knowing: Indigenous and Place-Based Ecological Knowledge
description: Based on indigenous and place-based "ways of knowing," this course (1) presents a theoretical and humanistic framework from which to understand generation of ecological knowledge; (2) examines processes by which to engage indigenous and place-based knowledge of natural resources, the nonhuman environment, and human-environment interactions; and (3) reflects upon the relevance of this knowledge to climatic change, resource extraction, food sovereignty, medicinal plant biodiversity, and issues of sustainability and conservation. The fundamental premise of this course is that human beings are embedded in their ecological systems. Graduate students are required to read supplemental materials, undertake more complex research assignments, and participate in seminar discussion section.

class: NTRES 6350
class title: Planning for Environmental Conservation and Sustainability
description: An interactive course designed to provide students with experience applying some of the most important techniques that are used to develop plans to protect and sustain valuable environmental resources, such as species, ecosystems, land, and water. The class focuses on highly charged controversies over conservation, and students learn how planning can help them to identify and address the full range of ecological and social factors that lead to conservation success in these contexts. Students adopt the roles of stakeholders and work on intensive case studies of conservation issues, learning how ecological and social insight are integrated for effective conservation planning. Topics covered in the course include rational planning, adaptive management, stakeholder engagement, and conflict resolution.
outcome: Students will learn to define conservation issues, develop plans (including goals, objectives, strategies, and actions) to address those issues, and identify potential positive and negative consequences of these plans., Students will be able to recognize and describe the range of ecological and social factors that influence the success of conservation efforts., Students will be able to identify and describe the stages of the planning process and learn how to carry out the activities that occur during these stages., For specific current issues in environmental conservation, students will recognize key stakeholder groups and be able to describe: these stakeholders' interests and concerns, points of contention between different stakeholders, and possible strategies and actions for addressing these points of contention., Students will develop their written and oral communication skills., Students will develop their abilities to work individually and in groups., For graduate credit, students will compare and contrast different approaches to planning for environmental conservation decisions., For graduate credit, students will analyze the strengths and weaknesses of common approaches to conflict resolution., 

class: NTRES 6500
class title: Climate Solutions Capstone
description: Interested in working toward solutions to the climate crisis? In this course, you will choose and implement a climate action from Project Drawdown's (www.drawdown.org) list of 82 climate solutions. You will also apply social sciences research to influence your friends or family to implement your climate action alongside you. For the capstone team project, you will work with other students and a community partner (Cornell Cooperative Extension or Climate Action Now) to support education related to plant-rich diet, low-emissions agriculture, forest regeneration, or other climate solutions. Interested students should have a general understanding of climate change science.
outcome: Compare approaches to mitigating climate change and choose an individual climate mitigation action., Apply social sciences research to develop and implement an action plan to influence one of your social networks (e.g., friends, family, Instagram followers) to take that action alongside you., Create your own arguments for the responsibility of individuals, corporations, and the broader collective to foster climate and food justice., Collaborate professionally and equitably with community partners to develop educational materials related to sustainable food, agricultural, and forestry practices and policies., Communicate through a variety of media including writing, presentations, and apps. Evaluate and respond to constructive peer feedback on discussion boards and during real-time online discussions., 

class: NTRES 6940
class title: Special Topics in Natural Resources
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the semester starts. Courses offered under the number will be approved by the department curriculum committee, and the same course is not offered more than twice under this number.

class: NTRES 6960
class title: Perspectives in Global Development
description: A variety of speakers present seminars on international development topics relating to sustainable development throughout the world. Students attend each seminar and submit a five-page essay at the end of the semester reflecting on the speakers' presentations and analyzing connections between topics.

class: NTRES 6970
class title: Graduate Individual Study in Natural Resources
description: Study of topics in natural resources more advanced than, or different from, other courses. Subject matter depends on interests of students and availability of staff.

class: NTRES 7900
class title: Graduate-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. students only before "A" exam has been passed.

class: NTRES 8900
class title: Master's Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for master's students.

class: NTRES 9900
class title: Doctoral-Level Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Ph.D. candidates after "A" exam has been passed.

class: ORIE 3150
class title: Financial and Managerial Accounting
description: Covers principles of accounting, financial reports, financial-transactions analysis, financial-statement analysis, budgeting, job order and process-cost systems, standard costing and variance analysis, and economic analysis of short-term decisions.

class: ORIE 3300
class title: Optimization I
description: Formulation of linear programming problems and solutions by the simplex method. Related topics such as sensitivity analysis, duality, and network programming. Applications include such models as resource allocation and production planning. Introduction to interior-point methods for linear programming.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210 or MATH 2940.

class: ORIE 3500
class title: Eng Probability and Statistics: Modeling and Data Science II
description: A rigorous foundation in theory combined with the methods for modeling, analyzing, and controlling randomness in engineering problems. Probabilistic ideas are used to construct models for engineering problems, and statistical methods are used to test and estimate parameters for these models. Specific topics include random variables, probability distributions, density functions, expectation and variance, multidimensional random variables, and important distributions including normal, Poisson, exponential, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, and point estimation using maximum likelihood and the method of moments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2700 or equivalent.

class: ORIE 4100
class title: Manufacturing Systems Design: A Consulting Boot Camp
description: This project-based course puts students in the roles of analysts and advisors to an industrial firm facing broad challenges in customer service, product quality, market share, and profitability. Students, working in teams, design a manufacturing logistics system and conduct capacity, material flow, and cost analyses of their design. By taking a view that integrates marketing, distribution, manufacturing, and engineering, students help the company transform into a world-class competitor.

class: ORIE 4340
class title: Applications of Optimization: Modeling and Computation
description: This course will cover the use of optimization models in several industries. Covered industries will include manufacturing, process, distribution, retail, and transportation. We will not cover models used exclusively in the financial industry. In each covered industry we will start with simple text-book models, and then extend these models to reflect the realities of the industry, the existing business decisions processes and the available data. We expect to have lectures from experts in some of these industries, each of whom will also discuss Operations Research roles and careers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300/5300.

class: ORIE 4350
class title: Introduction to Game Theory
description: Broad survey of the mathematical theory of games, including such topics as two-person matrix and bimatrix games; cooperative and noncooperative n-person games; and games in extensive, normal, and characteristic function form. Economic market games. Applications to weighted voting and cost allocation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300.

class: ORIE 4570
class title: Reinforcement Learning with Operations Research Applications
description: The ongoing information revolution and the advent of the big data era make quantitative methods in the business context indispensable. This course introduces reinforcement learning, decision-making under uncertainty, and related algorithms through the lens of OR applications. Examples will be drawn from real-world problems in operations, revenue management, queuing, finance, transportation, healthcare, and other areas of interest. The course will cover modeling and applications, basic theory, and algorithms.
outcome: Be able to formalize dynamic decision problems under uncertainty as Markov decision processes., Learn about finite-horizon and infinite-horizon MDPs., Know how to solve MDPs exactly via dynamic programming as well as know how to solve MDPs approximately via reinforcement learning., Learn to read the technical literature in operations research, machine learning, and control literature., Gain hands-on experience in implementing and applying various exact and approximate algorithms., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300 and ORIE 3500.

class: ORIE 4580
class title: Simulation Modeling and Analysis
description: Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation and discrete-event simulation. Topics include: random variate and process generation; data-driven distribution modeling; input and output analysis; modeling, analysis and optimization of complex systems.  Emphasizes tools and techniques needed in practice; in particular, modeling in simulation in Python, as well as commercial discrete-event simulation languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2110/ENGRD 2110. Corequisite: ORIE 3500 with the permission of instructor.

class: ORIE 4630
class title: Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering
description: Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation, and optimization.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: engineering math through MATH 2940, ENGRD 2700 and ORIE 3500, and knowledge of R and multiple linear regression equivalent to ORIE 3120. No previous knowledge of finance required.

class: ORIE 4990
class title: Teaching in ORIE
description: Involves working as a TA in an ORIE course. The instructor assigns credits (the guideline is 1 credit per four hours per week of work with a limit of 3 credits).

class: ORIE 4999
class title: ORIE Project
description: Project-type work, under faculty supervision, on a real problem existing in some firm or institution. Opportunities in the course may be discussed with the associate director.

class: ORIE 5100
class title: Manufacturing Systems Design: A Consulting Boot Camp
description: This project-based course puts students in the roles of analysts and advisors to an industrial firm facing broad challenges in customer service, product quality, market share, and profitability. Students, working in teams, design a manufacturing logistics system and conduct capacity, material flow, and cost analyses of their design. By taking a view that integrates marketing, distribution, manufacturing, and engineering, students help the company transform into a world-class competitor.

class: ORIE 5110
class title: Case Studies
description: Presents students with an unstructured problem that resembles a real-world situation. Students work in project groups to formulate mathematical models, perform computer analyses of the data and models, and present oral and written reports.

class: ORIE 5138
class title: Networks and Markets
description: The course examines how the computing, economic and sociological worlds are connected and how these connections affects these worlds. Tools from computer science, game theory and mathematics are introduced and then used to analyze network structures present in everyday life. Topics covered include social networks, web search, auctions, markets, voting, and crypto-currencies (e.g. bitcoin).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic probability.

class: ORIE 5140
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: enrollment in group-based project with strong system design component approved by course instructor.

class: ORIE 5160
class title: Topics in Data Science and OR
description: Each year, the course will cover a different advanced topic at the intersection of data science and operations research, with the specific topic to be chosen by the instructor that year. The class will entail advanced reading, homework, and course project. Example semester-long topics include: Multi-arm bandit models in ML and OR, Statistical recovery in data science and OR, Graphical models in data science and OR, Causal inference in data science and OR, and Reinforcement learning in data science and OR.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3120, ORIE 3300, ORIE 3310, ORIE 3500, ORIE 3510.

class: ORIE 5210
class title: Financial Engineering Colloquium
description: A weekly guest speaker series designed to broaden students' understanding and knowledge of the financial markets, challenges that industry is facing and learn about a variety of career paths within the field of quantitative finance.  Every week the students will hear from a different seasoned finance professional.

class: ORIE 5220
class title: Applied Financial Engineering (in NYC)
description: Project course in Manhattan satisfying the engineering design project requirement for the M.Eng degree.

class: ORIE 5230
class title: Quantitative Trading Strategies
description: This course covers numerical techniques for quantitative trading in Finance. The main computational tool is Python. The computational techniques draw from interpolation, linear algebra, optimization, stochastic control, Monte Carlo simulation, queuing theory, finite difference methods, binomial trees, as well as statistical techniques such as regression, co-integration and principal components analysis. The applications include pricing, market microstructure, hedging and asset allocation for bonds, futures, equities and options. The focus is on theories that can be implemented in trading situations and the Interactive Brokers platform is used extensively for trading assignments.

class: ORIE 5240
class title: Bond Mathematics and Mortgage-Backed Securities
description: A transaction-oriented course covering U.S. Bond markets. The course covers valuation, trading strategies, and risk profiles of bonds, with a special emphasis on mortgage-backed securities.

class: ORIE 5252
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering
description: This course is taught by a seasoned finance professional and focuses on the tools and techniques used by quantitative traders. The topics covered include risk measurement and management, alpha forecasting methods, and the development and application of trade execution cost models. The emphasis of the course is to enable students to apply quantitative financial models within a real-life trading environment.

class: ORIE 5253
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering II
description: This course is taught by a seasoned finance professional and provides an overview of the current challenges in the asset management industry and proposes practical solutions to overcome these challenges.

class: ORIE 5254
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering III
description: This course is taught by a seasoned finance professional and is designed to familiarize students with the most recent developments in the equity derivatives marketplace. The emphasis will be on practical side of trading and analyzing attractive strategies in the equity derivatives markets.

class: ORIE 5255
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering IV
description: This course is taught by a seasoned finance professional and will introduce students to the subject of market microstructure and the hottest areas of study within the field. Specifically, the course will focus on the recent electronification of the financial markets, and the resulting effects.

class: ORIE 5256
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering V
description: This course is taught by a seasoned finance professional. Machine learning (ML) is changing virtually every aspect of our lives. As it relates to finance, this is the most exciting time to adopt a disruptive technology that will transform how everyone invests for generations. Students will learn scientifically sound ML tools used in the financial industry.

class: ORIE 5257
class title: Special Topics in Financial Engineering VI
description: Algorithmic trading and ML-powered tools have impacted all asset classes: beyond the most liquid (and well-studied) equity markets, we have observed a growing number of assets (such as bonds, foreign exchange, crypto, on-line adverts, etc.) that are now primarily traded electronically, yet not necessarily via a classical exchange. In this course, we will cover the tools required to compete in FX, Rates and Crypto markets, covering the main protocols (price-streams, second-price auctions, etc.) with particular emphasis on how to apply the latest ML techniques to gain a competitive edge.

class: ORIE 5258
class title: Python for Finance
description: Python is rapidly becoming a golden standard for quantitative finance. In this course students will be exposed to the powerful and fast open-source data science libraries and specific applications of analyzing financial data sets.
outcome: Students will enhance their knowledge of  Python and Python libraries as they pertain to financial applications., Students will apply their data analysis and statistical knowledge for financial modeling and will work with financial data sets., Students will learn how to draw insights from data science algorithms with the help of Python packages., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2700 and familiarity with Python.

class: ORIE 5300
class title: Optimization I
description: Formulation of linear programming problems and solutions by the simplex method. Related topics such as sensitivity analysis, duality, and network programming. Applications include such models as resource allocation and production planning. Introduction to interior-point methods for linear programming.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940.

class: ORIE 5340
class title: Applications of Optimization: Modeling and Computation
description: This course will cover the use of optimization models in several industries. Covered industries will include manufacturing, process, distribution, retail, and transportation. We will not cover models used exclusively in the financial industry. In each covered industry we will start with simple text-book models, and then extend these models to reflect the realities of the industry, the existing business decisions processes and the available data. We expect to have lectures from experts in some of these industries, each of whom will also discuss Operations Research roles and careers.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300/5300.

class: ORIE 5350
class title: Introduction to Game Theory
description: Broad survey of the mathematical theory of games, including such topics as two-person matrix and bimatrix games; cooperative and noncooperative n-person games; and games in extensive, normal, and characteristic function form. Economic market games. Applications to weighted voting and cost allocation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300.

class: ORIE 5355
class title: Applied Data Science: Decision-Making Beyond Prediction
description: This course considers the data science challenges beyond training an accurate predictive model, especially for systems about people (data of behavior), and for people (deployed models to influence behavior). Whether for online marketplaces, transportation, governmental, or urban systems, effective data science in such settings requires dealing with user incentives and strategic behavior, networked and decentralized decision-making, and privacy and ethics concerns. Primary evaluation will be through programming based assignments (in Python) and conceptual questions.
outcome: Articulate common challenges in data science about and for people., Design, develop, and deploy data science models that effectively deal with such challenges., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: ENGRD 2700, CS 1380, or equivalent, and experience programming in Python. Recommended corequisite: INFO 5430 or CS 5785.

class: ORIE 5380
class title: Optimization Methods
description: This course covers algorithmic and computational tools for solving optimization problems with the goal of providing decision-support for business intelligence. We will cover the fundamentals of linear, integer and nonlinear optimization. We will emphasize optimization as a large-scale computational tool, and show how to link programming languages with optimization software to develop industrial-strength decision-support systems. We will demonstrate how to incorporate uncertainty into optimization problems. Throughout the course, we will cover a variety of modern applications, including pricing and marketing for e-commerce, ad auctions on the web, and on-line ride-sharing.

class: ORIE 5500
class title: Eng Probability and Statistics: Modeling and Data Science II
description: A rigorous foundation in theory combined with the methods for modeling, analyzing, and controlling randomness in engineering problems. Probabilistic ideas are used to construct models for engineering problems, and statistical methods are used to test and estimate parameters for these models. Specific topics include random variables, probability distributions, density functions, expectation and variance, multidimensional random variables, and important distributions including normal, Poisson, exponential, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, and point estimation using maximum likelihood and the method of moments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2700.

class: ORIE 5530
class title: Modeling Under Uncertainty
description: We will learn how to model randomness, analyze its impact, and make optimal decisions when it is present. We will cover stochastic modeling techniques, statistical principles, simulation, and decision-making under uncertainty. Using applications, we will demonstrate how we can use statistical principles to gain insight from data generated by systems with randomness. We will use simulation models to assess the performance of such systems and gauge how it changes in response to our decisions. We will introduce and use stochastic modeling techniques, such as Markov chains and Poisson processes, to build models of random phenomena and use these to gain understanding and guide decisions. As well as covering theoretical concepts, the course will put substantial emphasis in computational implementation of both simulation and decision-making problems.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2700.

class: ORIE 5570
class title: Reinforcement Learning with Operations Research Applications
description: The ongoing information revolution and the advent of the big data era make quantitative methods in the business context indispensable. This course introduces reinforcement learning, decision-making under uncertainty, and related algorithms through the lens of OR applications. Examples will be drawn from real-world problems in operations, revenue management, queuing, finance, transportation, healthcare, and other areas of interest. The course will cover modeling and applications, basic theory, and algorithms.
outcome: Be able to formalize dynamic decision problems under uncertainty as Markov decision processes., Learn about finite-horizon and infinite-horizon MDPs., Know how to solve MDPs exactly via dynamic programming as well as know how to solve MDPs approximately via reinforcement learning., Learn to read the technical literature in operations research, machine learning, and control literature., Gain hands-on experience in implementing and applying various exact and approximate algorithms., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3300, ORIE 3500, or equivalent.

class: ORIE 5580
class title: Simulation Modeling and Analysis
description: Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation and discrete-event simulation. Topics include: random variate and process generation; data-driven distribution modeling; input and output analysis; modeling, analysis and optimization of complex systems.  Emphasizes tools and techniques needed in practice; in particular, modeling and simulation in Python, as well as commercial discrete-event simulation languages.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3500 or equivalent, CS 2110/ENGRD 2110. For students with insufficient background in probability, ORIE 3500 must be taken in parallel.

class: ORIE 5581
class title: Monte Carlo Simulation
description: Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation. Topics include: random variate and process generation; data-driven distribution modeling; input and output analysis. Emphasizes modeling and simulation in Python.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3500 or equivalent, CS 2110/ENGRD 2110. For students with insufficient background in probability, ORIE 3500 must be taken in parallel.

class: ORIE 5600
class title: Financial Engineering with Stochastic Calculus I
description: Introduction to continuous-time models of financial engineering and the mathematical tools required to use them, starting with the Black-Scholes model. Driven by the problem of derivative security pricing and hedging in this model, the course develops a practical knowledge of stochastic calculus from an elementary standpoint, covering topics including Brownian motion, martingales, the Ito formula, the Feynman-Kac formula, and Girsanov transformations.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ORIE 3510.

class: ORIE 5630
class title: Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering
description: Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation, and optimization.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940, ENGRD 2700, ORIE 3500, ORIE 3120.

class: ORIE 5750
class title: Applied Machine Learning
description: Learn and apply key concepts of modeling, analysis and validation from machine learning, data mining and signal processing to analyze and extract meaning from data. Implement algorithms and perform experiments on images, text, audio and mobile sensor measurements. Gain working knowledge of supervised and unsupervised techniques including classification, regression, clustering, feature selection, and dimensionality reduction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 2800 or the equivalent plus basic familiarity with Matlab or Python, or permission of the instructor.

class: ORIE 5910
class title: Manufacturing Option Project
description: Project course coordinated by Center for Manufacturing Enterprise.

class: ORIE 5915
class title: MEng Career Practicum
description: A professional development course designed specifically for MEng students in ORIE. Through a series of panels and hands-on workshops, you will develop effective job search materials and participate in active exercises covering topics such as networking, interviewing for specific career paths, and other communication skills for today's professional environments.

class: ORIE 5925
class title: M.Eng. Professional Review
description: An interactive course in which students present findings and share lessons from their summer internship experiences.

class: ORIE 5980
class title: ORIE Master of Engineering Project
description: Initial segment of the Master of Engineering project experience, culminating in a project charter that details the problem statement, the data and resources to be used, and a work plan for the spring semester.

class: ORIE 5999
class title: Special Projects in ORIE
description: Faculty-supervised project work that may involve independent readings, scholarly research, or an applied project in collaboration with a Cornell entity or an external partner organization.  Students must submit a proposal detailing the project goals, statement of work, deliverables, and learning outcomes.  The proposal must be approved by the supervising faculty member and the student's program director.

class: ORIE 6300
class title: Mathematical Programming I
description: Rigorous treatment of the theory and computational techniques of linear programming and its extensions, including formulation, duality theory, algorithms; sensitivity analysis; network flow problems and algorithms; theory of polyhedral convex sets, systems of linear equations and inequalities, Farkas' Lemma; and exploiting special structure in the simplex method and computational implementation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: advanced calculus and elementary linear algebra.

class: ORIE 6500
class title: Applied Stochastic Processes
description: Introduction to stochastic processes that presents the basic theory together with a variety of applications. Topics include Markov processes, renewal theory, random walks, branching processes, Brownian motion, stationary processes, martingales, and point processes.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one-semester calculus-based probability course.

class: ORIE 6700
class title: Statistical Principles
description: Topics include review of distribution theory of special interest in statistics: normal, chi-square, binomial, Poisson, t, and F; introduction to statistical decision theory; sufficient statistics; theory of minimum variance unbiased point estimation; maximum likelihood and Bayes estimation; basic principles of hypothesis testing, including Neyman-Pearson Lemma and likelihood ratio principle; confidence interval construction; and introduction to linear models.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate probability/statistics course.

class: ORIE 6730
class title: Mathematics of Deep Learning
description: Empirical observation of deep neural networks shows surprising phenomena that classical statistical theory fails to fully describe. For example, bounds on generalization error from classical statistics grow with the flexibility of the model class but neural networks often exhibit low generalization error despite being extremely flexible. Also, training deep neural networks with stochastic gradient descent produces accurate models despite non-convexity of the loss landscape. A recently emerged literature is developing new theory to explain these and other mysteries. After presenting relevant theoretical results from classical statistics and a brief refresher on deep learning, the course will present theoretical results from recent research articles, complementing them with empirical evidence, emphasizing what is unknown along with what is known.
outcome: Identify the main ideas in classical statistical theory and what phenomena they fail to explain in deep learning., Identify the main hypotheses in the recent literature for the emergence of these phenomena and the evidence for and against these hypotheses., Demonstrate an understanding of the main ideas in recent theoretical results explaining why deep learning works so well., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 4782 or CS 5787, and ORIE 6500.

class: ORIE 7170
class title: Theory of Linear Models
description: Properties of the multivariate normal distribution. Distribution theory for quadratic forms. Properties of least squares and maximum likelihood estimates. Methods for fixed-effect models of less than full rank. Analysis of balanced and unbalanced mixed-effects models. Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. Some use of software packages and illustrative examples.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 4090, BTRY 6020, or equivalents.

class: ORIE 7590
class title: Selected Topics in Applied Probability
description: Topics are chosen from current literature and research areas of the staff.

class: ORIE 7999
class title: PhD Independent Research
description: Independent research for ORIE Ph.D. students.

class: ORIE 9000
class title: ORIE Graduate Colloquium
description: Weekly one and one-half hour meeting devoted to presentations by distinguished visitors, by faculty members, and by advanced graduate students on topics of current research in the field of operations research.

class: PE 1100
class title: Beginning Swimming
description: An entry level class for those with little or no swimming experience. Instruction and practice in the basic skills necessary to meet the University Swim Requirement. Areas of emphasis are: developing proper body position on the front and back, proper breathing technique, Front Crawl, Elementary Backstroke, treading and swimming in deep water.

class: PE 1101
class title: Advanced Beginner Swimming
description: Ideal for all who have taken Beginning Swimming or have some basic knowledge of how to swim, regardless of whether the University Swim Requirement was successfully met. Areas of emphasis are the Front Crawl with rotary breathing, Back Crawl, Elementary Backstroke, diving, treading water, and underwater swimming. The primary objective is to strengthen the student's confidence and competence.

class: PE 1102
class title: Intermediate Swimming
description: Practice and perfection of the techniques for the five basic strokes: Front Crawl, Back Crawl, Elementary Backstroke, Breaststroke, Sidestroke. Students should already know how to swim on their front and back, be comfortable in deep water and be able to swim six (6) lengths of the pool (150 yds.) without stopping.

class: PE 1104
class title: Swim Conditioning
description: Introduction to and practice of different types of training methods. Final objectives: 2,500 yards in one class period. This is primarily a conditioning course and not an instructional course on stroke technique. The focus will be on workouts, workout planning and different types of training methods. This course is intended for more advanced swimmers. Students who have completed Beginning or Advanced Beginner Swimming may have a very difficult time in this course.

class: PE 1130
class title: Open Water Scuba
description: Program includes knowledge development and skill training in the pool. All classes are referral only (no open water dives), meaning students will need to pickup their paperwork and complete four additional dives in open water within one year from the last training section to receive a PADI Open Water Diver certification. For more information, please see: www.pe.cornell.edu/.

class: PE 1132
class title: Rescue Diver
description: Advanced level course for people who have completed Advanced Open Water Certification and are interested in learning rescue and safety techniques and how to handle emergency situations. The PADI® Rescue Diver course will change the way you dive – in the best possible way. Learn to identify and fix minor issues before they become big problems, gain a lot of confidence and have serious fun along the way. Discover why countless divers say Rescue Diver is their favorite scuba course. You will complete knowledge development in advance of the class through eLearning (time commitment: 8-12 hours). The water training sessions are serious fun. You'll practice handling scenarios such as a leg cramp and assisting a tired diver by role-playing with other students and your instructor and will include time in the pool for skill practice before heading to the lake for scenarios (total time commitment: 4-7 days).
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PADI Adventure Diver/Junior Adventure Diver (or qualifying certification) with completed Underwater Navigation Dive; EFR Primary and Secondary Care training (or qualifying training) within 24 months.

class: PE 1150
class title: Ballroom Dancing
description: This is a beginning level class introducing students to Social Ballroom Dance. Participants can expect to have fun, learn some history of American Social Dance, learn about movement - how to move with your partner, how to move to the music, and enough 'moves' in five different dances (Waltz, Foxtrot, Tango, Rumba and Cha Cha) to get a taste of and a general feel for each dance. Please note: The Sunday section is for students enrolling with a partner and there is limited rotation of partners during class. Partners should enroll via Student Center at the same time to ensure that both partners get into the Sunday section. The Wednesday section is for students who either don't have a partner or don't mind rotating partners in the class. Changing partners generally results in improved mastery.

class: PE 1152
class title: Beginning Ballroom Dance Smooth
description: Offered during the fall semester, this is a beginning level class that introduces students to three American Smooth Style ballroom dances – Waltz, Foxtrot and Tango. This class will go further in depth than the Beginning Social Ballroom Dance class (PE1150). This class is appropriate for either beginners or students with some experience who wish to further develop their knowledge and skill in the dances covered. Participants will gain some mastery of each dance, develop partnering skills, technique, movement, styling and musicality. It is not necessary to sign up with a partner, however it is recommended to ensure balance between leads and follows. Participants will change partners throughout the class.  

class: PE 1155
class title: Introduction to Belly Dancing
description: Belly Dance, as it is known in the West, is an exciting and beautiful art form originating in the Middle East and North Africa. Belly Dance is a fun way to develop flexibility, body awareness, and overall body strength. Learning correct posture, muscle control, and dance movement in each class, we will end the semester with a short choreography. Comfortable clothing suitable for exercise is worn. Please feel free to bring a hip scarf to class. Beginners and experienced dancers welcome.

class: PE 1160
class title: Latin Dance
description: This class introduces Salsa, Bachata, Merengue, Cha Cha Cha, Son and Comparsa. Salsa derives from the Cuban rhythm of Son. As a music and dance form, it has acquired regional variations and absorbed influences from different parts of Latin America and other continents. Bachata and Merengue are quintessential dances of the Dominican Republic. Comparsa is a form of carnival line dance. Cha Cha Cha originates in Cuba, finds expression in Rock n' Roll and western pop music, and is traditionally danced "contratiempo." In this course, we learn the basics of all of these dances. Instruction emphasizes the development of foundations in musical timing, rhythm, body movement, lead-follow connection and space use. Class begins with a stretch and body movement warm-up. We then teach dance step sequences across the floor, in rotating lines, as freestyle and in partner format. The skills learned in each dance are interrelated - as you improve in one you develop a sensibility for the others. By the end of this course you will be able to take Latin dance to a higher level and learn other partnered dances. No partner is necessary to register. Couple sign-up is encouraged. Partners rotate. This class is gender-free: each student is free to learn the lead or follow role.

class: PE 1162
class title: Salsa
description: This class covers beginner through advanced beginner Salsa moves. Students learn step variations and turn patterns as seen in Latin social dance and nightclub settings. Class begins with a warm-up of Salsa step patterns, also known as "shines." We then move into combinations for couples and learn patterns with rotating partners. Latin body movement and rhythm is taught in the warm-up and partner sections. In partner work, emphasis is placed on: lead-follow connection; frame and tension; spatial awareness; nuance and flow. Salsa in Rueda de Casino format will be introduced later in the semester as an additional way to enjoy Salsa. In Rueda, dancers change partners within a circle and perform dynamic combinations to the arrangement of a caller. Rueda is also a teaching tool used to improve timing and release energy. Learning aids include a syllabus, music, smartphone application and video tutorial. No partner is necessary to register. Couple sign-up is encouraged. This class is gender-free: each student is free to choose the lead or follow role.

class: PE 1167
class title: Introduction to Tango
description: Introduction to the fundamentals of Tango dancing and its origins. Focus is on movement on the dance floor and how to be connected to your partner. Other aspects include learning to differentiate between the genres of Tango music (Tango, Milonga, Candombe, and Vals).

class: PE 1170
class title: Introduction to Swing Dance
description: In this class you will learn the basics of Lindy Hop (also called Jitterbug and East Coast Swing), a social dance originated by Black Americans in the early twentieth century that is still popular today all around the world. We will work on footwork, timing, partnering, and musicality, with the goal of empowering you to have fun on the social dance floor—at weddings, parties, and wherever there's good rythmic music playing! You'll learn to improvise and have the opportunity to create short choreographs too. No dance experience or partner is necessary. In fact, you will change partners frequently in class. Wear clothes you are comfortable moving in. Shoes must have leather soles OR be white-soled sneakers with the treads worn smooth, or you can dance in socks.

class: PE 1233
class title: Bootcamp
description: This course is designed as a modern military style workout program with an emphasis on both aerobic and anaerobic fitness. Each workout session will consist of stretching, warm-up calisthenics, cardio training, full body resistance training, core activation and cool down stretching. This is a high energy course that will teach students the importance of motivation, enthusiasm and teamwork while familiarizing them with total-fitness techniques and concepts. If you are ready to push yourself and train hard, Bootcamp is for you. Students of all fitness levels will benefit greatly from this course.

class: PE 1235
class title: 8 O'Clock Rock
description: This class combines the best of the Principals of Weight Training and Cardio Crazy to get your day off to a rocking and rolling great start. Students will use resistance and cardio equipment to create the perfect morning wake-up call.

class: PE 1237
class title: Yasaride
description: This class combines two wonderful activities, indoor cycling and yoga into a mindful stress reducing hour of fitness. The yoga portion will focus on full body stretching as well as areas that need more attention after cycling such as hamstrings, hips, and the spine.  The class will also include work on breath, alignment, and mindfulness in both the cycling and yoga portions of the class. The length of time for each activity will vary from class to class. 

class: PE 1238
class title: Barre
description: Barre is a high energy, low-impact, full body work out. You will target specific muscles using isolated exercises to sculpt your arms, legs and seat, all while keeping the focus on core and alignment. Although inspired by ballet and set to music, this is not a dance class. This course is an open-level format to help you build strength, improve posture and flexibility while creating long, lean muscles. 

class: PE 1241
class title: Mobility and Core Training
description: Mobility and stability are fundamental components of our daily movement. Whether you are highly active, not active at all, or somewhere in between, this course will teach you about these subtle yet critical details of exercise. Through various mobility and flexibility exercises, you will learn how to tune your muscles for optimal length-tension relationships, while at the same time learning core strengthening exercises to help counter faulty postures from long hours of sitting.

class: PE 1245
class title: Indoor Stationary Cycling
description: Based on the foundation of the Spinning® Program this indoor stationary cycling class combines basic cycling movements with motivational coaching, breathing awareness, and heart rate training. This non-impact, individually paced, cardiovascular fitness class is held in a fun environment with music that will move you! A great alternative to traditional group fitness classes.

class: PE 1246
class title: Open Gym Class
description: This Open Gym PE course offers an exclusive time and space to students who have previous experience with exercise. The Cornell Fitness Centers offer a wide variety of free weight and cardio equipment, and experience with this equipment is mandatory for this course. An instructor will be on staff to supervise and assist students with their training, but independent exercise should be expected.

class: PE 1250
class title: Army ROTC Physical Training
description: Physical training is a key component to any personal development program. Training early and often allows one to get the day's workout out of the way, starting the day focused and relaxed, and increasing discipline throughout the semester. Physical training consists of early morning workouts with Army ROTC Cadets and Instructors, that focus on cardiovascular and muscular development, following a holistic workout to help achieve a strong core and heart. Choosing to enroll and participate in PE 1250 does not mean you signed up for the Army ROTC program.

class: PE 1260
class title: Cardio Kickboxing
description: Cardio-Kickboxing is a series of movements that consists of kicks, punches, and blocks done to music. It is similar to a typical aerobics class except the moves consist of martial arts techniques. Cardio-Kickboxing is a total body workout in its most complete form burning hundreds of calories and hour. No experience necessary.

class: PE 1261
class title: Fitness and Conditioning
description: Fitness and conditioning is designed to familiarize the student with several different forms of exercise. Facilities used include the track, the gymnasium and other places around campus. The components of physical fitness include cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength, general flexibility and agility. The course will offer activities that enhance each component and help the individual to design a personal conditioning program for future fitness and well-being.

class: PE 1262
class title: Fitness for Women
description: The design of this course includes both lecture and physical activity. Students are presented with a variety of topics and information that involves physical fitness and health. Each student will learn to design a fitness program that is geared toward her own interests and abilities. Topics include: nutrition, time management, relaxation techniques, and stress management. Activities will include aerobic dance, walking, jogging, weight training, flexibility exercises, relaxation and stress management routines, and yoga techniques.

class: PE 1265
class title: Wellness and Fitness
description: "Here's to a Healthier You" - A wellness experience for the busy student. This course will assess the student's physical fitness status, and overall lifestyle health habits. Strength training basics emphasize how to properly perform exercises for each of the major muscle groups of the body.  Program Planning, Nutrition and Stress Management are also presented. 

class: PE 1271
class title: Jogging Tours
description: This course is designed for the beginner to intermediate runner. Daily instruction will focus on running form and technique, as well as building aerobic capacity. Students should arrive to class prepared to run either indoors or outdoors.

class: PE 1272
class title: Walking Tours
description: A series of walking tours around the Cornell Campus and beyond. Class will meet regardless of weather, so please come prepared.

class: PE 1273
class title: Walking Meditation
description: This course combines walking and meditation, two life-enhancing activities that can help students create balance in their hectic lives. Walking is the optimum exercise for good health and meditation offers the opportunity to calm an active and busy mind. Drawing on the teachings from the Vietnamese Zen Buddist monk, Thich Nhat Hanh, will involve meditating in motion.

class: PE 1290
class title: Introduction to Gymnastics
description: This class is an introduction to all of the men's and women's gymnastics events. Instruction will focus on beginner level skills with emphasis on tumbling and acrobatics. No experience is necessary and all ability levels are welcome. Students must have a basic level of fitness and upper body strength.

class: PE 1300
class title: Introduction to Bowling
description: Instruction available during each class session for the Beginning or Intermediate level bowler. Choice of two 45 minute classes per week or one class for 90 minutes. Shoe rental included in course fee which covers approximately 72 games.

class: PE 1311
class title: Fly Fishing
description: This course introduces the student to the beautiful sport of fly fishing. Topics covered include fly tying, knots and rigging, casting and presentation, and what species of fish you can catch locally. Students will tie fly patterns that are appropriate for fishing opportunities in this region. The course will feature classroom sessions and fishing on Beebe Lake as well. Students will primarily be fishing for cold and warm water species including trout, bass and pan fish. All fly fishing tackle, fly tying materials and tools are included. The goal is for the student to catch a fish on a fly they tied.

class: PE 1312
class title: Ultimate Bass Fishing
description: This class is for anyone who wants to learn more about North America's most popular fish, the bass. Whether you just want to fish from the bank, a kayak or a professional bass boat, this class is aimed for anyone from a beginner to an avid angler. The course will feature classroom sessions and fishing on Beebe Lake as well. Students will enjoy hands-on procedures such as knot tying, the newest and hottest lure rigging, learning to cast spinning and casting combos, along with other bass catching techniques. Topics such as bass habits, habitats, seasonal patterns, the differences between smallmouth and largemouth bass, and good area bass waters will be covered.

class: PE 1320
class title: Professional Instructional Golf
description: Equipment furnished. PGA program of instruction geared to all levels of experience and ability. The objective is to give beginners enough skill to play, and to give more advanced players direction in their thinking, practice, and play, through a thorough understanding of fundamentals.

class: PE 1321
class title: Advanced Golf
description: Students must be experienced golfers (i.e. they MUST have golf playing experience on a course) and have their own set of clubs. Students who do not have the appropriate skills will be removed from the course and will not receive a refund.  The objective is to give advanced players instruction and practice to improve golfing skills.  
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: experienced golfers.

class: PE 1336
class title: Wakeboarding and Wakesurfing
description: This class is designed for students who want to learn (or improve their skills at) wakeboarding and wake surfing on beautiful Cayuga Lake. Enjoy time on the water with fellow students, cheer each other on as you learn and practice water sports that connect your mind and body (and fill you with enjoyment), and improve your fitness as you fulfill a PE credit. If you have snowboarded or skateboarded and always wanted to try surfing or wakeboarding, this course is for you. Or if you have always wanted to try a watersport but haven't had the chance, you will find a welcoming environment to try out something new and fun for you. Class consists of six three-hour sessions on the lake with a class size of six (or fewer students) each session, giving you at least 30 minutes of practice every class.  We have a GoPro set up to capture your riding so that you can analyze your footage and learn from what you did well and what you can improve. The boat will depart from the Merrill Family Sailing Center each class (transportation to and from there is not provided). 
 

class: PE 1340
class title: Juggling
description: The course focuses on teaching 3 ball juggling patterns as well as introducing a wide variety of other props which may include: rings, clubs, diabolo, flower sticks, poi, and spinning plates. Advanced students will also be able to learn club passing, 4 and 5 balls and advanced tricks. 

class: PE 1345
class title: Introduction to Boxing
description: One of the oldest forms of competition known, boxing has become the sport of choice for many people. Boxing's simplistic method has few techniques, yet the application of these techniques is the true art and science of the sport. This course teaches the fundamentals and proven training methods that are sure to improve and develop your defensive and offensive skills, cardiovascular endurance, footwork, agility, speed, timing and power. Training will include shadow boxing, jump rope, two person drills, and focus glove work. Learn the fundamentals of one of the world's most popular sports.

class: PE 1346
class title: Intermediate Boxing
description: Covers the basic skills of footwork, defensive, and offensive techniques at an Intermediate level. Jumping rope, advanced footwork, offensive and defensive skills, shadow boxing, and focus glove work are taught as methods for individual aerobic conditioning, and mastering the fundamentals of Boxing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: the student must have proof of a recent physical performed by a physician and at least one (1) semester of PE 1345.

class: PE 1347
class title: Brazilian Jiu Jitsu Fundamentals
description: Brazilian Jiu Jitsu, known as BJJ was developed by Helio Gracie, and continues to develop as one of the most popular forms of grappling in the world today. This class focuses on learning and applying fundamental techniques of Brazilian Jiu Jitsu. Students practice various techniques using a traditional GI/kimono. Students will learn and practice positioning, escapes, submissions, and self-defense. The fundamentals class is directed not only for the beginner but also for students who would like to sharpen basic techniques.

class: PE 1365
class title: Karate Basics
description: This class is meant for those that want to start studying Karate or have not studied in a while.  Students learn about traditional Okinawan Karate (Shito Ryu) by practicing self-defense combinations that involve blocks, strikes, kicks, joint locks and throws.  Along the way we will work on stances, body positioning/mechanics and conditioning.  There is strong emphasis on partner work as a mechanism to practice what is being taught in a safe and controlled environment.  Free sparring and competition are not part of this class.  The last day of class students are encouraged to participate in that semester's belt test.  Passing this test sets you up to continue studying with the next class, should you decide to continue your studies of Karate.

class: PE 1366
class title: Karate
description: This class is meant for those that have recently studied Karate at Cornell or somewhere else and wish to continue their study of Karate.  Primary instruction is in the Shito Ryu style.  Every semester a different kata is presented along with the applicable self-defense techniques associated with that kata and there is an opportunity to test for a new rank/belt.  Bo staff is used as part of one kata in the curriculum.

class: PE 1371
class title: Okinawan Karate-do
description: Explosive strikes, strong stances, and controlled footwork make Okinawan Karate-do an effective form of self-defense for men and women of all ages and body types. The physical practice of Okinawan Karate-do is an excellent pathway to increased fitness and improved holistic health. Practiced as a traditional martial art, Okinawan Karate-do facilitates personal development and greater well-being.

class: PE 1375
class title: Beginning Tae Kwon Do
description: C.W. (Cho Whang) TaeKwonDo of Ithaca conducts the course. The purpose of the program is to teach TaeKwonDo in its diverse aspects as a form of self-defense, as an art form, and as a competitive sport. Classes will consist of extensive stretching, the teaching of basics to beginners, forms of self-defense, and sparring techniques. TaeKwonDo emphasizes the use of the whole body, enhances flexibility and coordination and increases aerobic capability. Promotional tests are held at the end of each semester. Han Cho may be reached at 257-7810.

class: PE 1376
class title: Intermediate Tae Kwon Do
description: C.W. (Cho Whang) TaeKwonDo of Ithaca conducts the course. At least one semester of PE TaeKwonDo or equivalent is required.  The purpose of the program is to teach TaeKwonDo in its diverse aspects as a form of self-defense, as an art form, and as a competitive sport. Classes will consist of extensive stretching, the teaching of basics to beginners, forms of self-defense, and sparring techniques. TaeKwonDo emphasizes the use of the whole body, enhances flexibility and coordination and increases aerobic capability. Promotional tests are held at the end of each semester. Han Cho may be reached at 257-7810.

class: PE 1380
class title: Tai Chi Chuan
description: Fundamentally, Tai Chi is an integrative exercise that joins the various elements of functional fitness into a single, organically connected whole. Through a rich vocabulary of movements that enhance spatial and body awareness, Tai Chi provides a medium for harmonizing balance, coordination, flexibility, and supple strength. This course will consist of warm-ups, stretching, an introduction to the 24 Movement Form, and 2 person interactive exercises. Please loose, comfortable clothing. Students must be in bare or sock feet during class.

class: PE 1385
class title: Thai Boxing
description: This martial art system, developed from the unique culture of Thailand, is a blend of art, science and sport. The Thai art is a very powerful ring fighting method, yet is also an excellent form of physical conditioning and street self-defense. The fighting techniques taught in Thai boxing include; the Western Boxing method, elbow -knee strikes, and the powerful Thai style of kicking. This combined with the unique training method and discipline makes Thai Boxing one of the most effective systems in the world. Kevin Seaman is the New York State Representative for the Thai Boxing Association USA.

class: PE 1396
class title: Filipino Kali
description: This is an eclectic form of Filipino stick fighting and self defense that evolved as a means of preservation in the hostile environment of the Jungles of the Philippines. Having roots in the 9th century, this is one martial art that truly equalizes your chances of survival in even the most dangerous circumstances, yet is also an amazing method of increasing your coordination and fitness, keeping both your mind and your body SHARP! Kali/Escrima addresses empty hand and kicking, grappling, and tools of the jungle warrior. Kevin Seaman has studied with many of the leading exponents of this amazing Martial Art for nearly 30 years. His skill in this art made him a regional, National and World Champion, competing Full Contact in Asia in 1992.

class: PE 1405
class title: Living Routines
description: Once a week you will participate in a health routine. After a short brisk walk, (inside in poor weather) you will engage in an energizing stretching session, followed by a short meditation. In addition to being introduced to stretching and meditation, the class will offer you the opportunity to get to know your classmates through partnered self-awareness exercises and group sharing.

class: PE 1420
class title: Introduction to Meditation
description: This course provides the opportunity to explore a variety of ancient and modern methods designed to bring one to the state of meditation. The methods serve to evoke the deep relaxation from which heightened awareness and creativity arise. If these classes do not fit your schedule, try Body-Mind, Living Routines or Moving into the Moment which have meditation in them.

class: PE 1421
class title: Relaxation and Stress Management
description: This course offers a mind/body approach to gaining realization and managing the stress in our lives. Participants will leave this course with a greater understanding and appreciation of their own unique ways of coping with stressful situations. We will explore a variety of techniques which can be used to ease the pressures of student life. A sample of these activities includes; stretching (Yoga), creative art, conversation, new games and meditation.

class: PE 1422
class title: Meditation and Relaxation
description: This course is designed to assist you in learning to meditate, or to deepen your existing practice. As you learn to practice meditation and relaxation exercises, you will find that as little as 15 minutes a day can benefit your physical, mental, emotional and spiritual health. With some assistance, we are all capable of learning to relax deeply, sleep better, detach from the mind's chatter, focus with renewed concentration and become aware of the joy and energy that is deep within us. If these classes do not fit your schedule, try Body-Mind or Living Routines which both have meditation in them.

class: PE 1424
class title: Yoga Trapeze
description: Yoga Trapeze combines the traditional yoga practice with TRX strength training as well as the fun and physical benefits of inversion therapy. Hanging upside down can relieve tension and compression in the neck and spine, while other hanging postures develop grip and pull strength in the hands and shoulders. Other full-body exercises will not only build strength, but will be a great way to advance their yoga practice of backbends, arm balances, and inversions. This course combines strength-building, flexibility, stress-reduction, and fun all in one!
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: some previous practice of yoga is strongly encouraged.

class: PE 1427
class title: Ashtanga Yoga Foundations
description: This beginner's class will introduce Ashtanga Yoga to the new student. With asanas (poses) from the Primary Series we will focus on using the breath, core engagement, and gaze point to begin your own home-based practice. We will also introduce breath work and meditation. Leave the class feeling energized, refreshed, and strong. 

class: PE 1429
class title: Vinyasa Yoga
description: This course teaches the practice of Vinyasa Yoga. It explores postures flowing from one to the next (breath to movement) and also includes study of philosophy, meditation, breath-work, and alignment. 

class: PE 1430
class title: Introduction to Yoga
description: Learn the alignment foundations of yoga while building strength, flexibility, and vitality! This class is for those who are new to yoga or those looking to fine tune their practice. Students will learn the "ins and outs" of a variety of standing poses, back bends, and maybe even a few inversions or arm balances! Modifications will be given to accommodate all levels. Each class will also include breath instruction and poses for stress reduction. 

class: PE 1431
class title: Intermediate Yoga
description: The course covers more of the fundamentals of Hatha Yoga, including basic postures, breathing techniques, and deep relaxation and chanting techniques.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous yoga experience.

class: PE 1439
class title: HIIT Yoga
description: HIIT yoga is a great way to get your heart rate up, burn calories, and have a mind-body connection. This class will have equal amounts of high intensity interval training and yoga to keep you moving and stretching throughout each session. Expect to warm up with Sun Salutations, then head to work with resistance training and functional movement drills. Cool down with yoga poses to keep your body and mind steady and calm.

class: PE 1440
class title: Introduction to Badminton
description: Instruction and practice in the basic skills and rules for both singles and doubles play.

class: PE 1441
class title: Intermediate Badminton
description: Should have past experience in badminton. Strategies are taught for both singles and doubles play.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students should have past experience in badminton.

class: PE 1445
class title: Outdoor Beginning Tennis
description: Instruction and practice in the basic skills of the game. Grip, serve, forehand, backhand, and lob are areas covered along with scoring systems. All equipment is furnished.

class: PE 1446
class title: Outdoor Intermediate Tennis
description: Review and further instruction in strokes: forehand, backhand, serve, volley, and lob. Topspin and underspin are covered along with doubles strategy. All equipment is furnished.

class: PE 1447
class title: Outdoor Advanced Tennis
description: For players with high school team or tournament experience. Skills emphasized are spins, serve and return of serve, volley, overhead smash, court positioning, and playing strategies.

class: PE 1448
class title: Pickleball
description: Pickleball is fun, social and friendly sport that combines elements of tennis, badminton and ping-pong. It can be played both indoors and outdoors on a badminton-sized court and a slightly modified tennis net. The rules are simple and the game is easy for beginners to learn, but can develop into a fast-paced, competitive game. Class includes equipment, instruction and practice in the basic skills and rules for both singles and doubles play. 

class: PE 1465
class title: Introduction to Squash
description: A beginner's course where rules of the game, basic strokes and strategies are taught. This class will also provide students with an invigorating cardio workout which may necessitate a shower following class. Please note: a pair of non-marking court shoes will be needed. All other equipment is provided, including safety glasses that are required to be worn at all times.

class: PE 1466
class title: Intermediate Squash
description: More advanced techniques than beginning squash. This class will also provide students with an invigorating cardio workout which may necessitate a shower following class. Please note: a pair of non-marking court shoes will be needed. All other equipment is provided, including safety glasses that are required to be worn at all times.

class: PE 1480
class title: Introduction to Small Boat Sailing
description: This course teaches the basic skills necessary to sail 2-person dinghies. Skills learned include: sailing terminology, knots, safety and etiquette, boat handling, sail trimming, capsize recovery and heavy wind considerations. There are a total of eighteen hours of instruction on shore or Cayuga Lake depending on weather. Course fee includes all equipment. Come dressed for the weather, as you will get wet. Open to sailors of all skill levels.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must be able to swim 75 yards (equivalent to University swim test requirement).

class: PE 1482
class title: Basic Keelboat Sailing
description: This course teaches the basic skills necessary to sail 18 - 26 foot keelboats. Skills learned include: sailing terminology, knots, safety and etiquette, boat handling, sail trimming and heavy wind considerations. There are a total of eighteen hours of instruction on shore or Cayuga Lake depending on weather. Course fee includes all equipment. Come dressed for the weather, as we will sail rain or shine. Open to sailors of all skill levels.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must be able to swim 75 yards (equivalent to University swim test requirement).

class: PE 1505
class title: Introduction to Trap and Skeet
description: Class meets off campus at the Tompkins County Fish and Game Club (transportation to and from not provided). Guns and shells furnished. Cost includes birds, shells, range use and instruction. Major emphasis is placed on safety resulting from a thorough understanding of the operation of the firearm and personal responsibility of each individual on the range. 

class: PE 1510
class title: Riflery
description: Instruction and practice in the use of a small bore target rifle. Major emphasis is placed on safety resulting from a thorough understanding of the operation of the firearm and the personal responsibility of each individual on the range. Class meets off campus at the Tompkins County Fish and Game Club (transportation to and from not provided).

class: PE 1515
class title: Introduction to Handgun Safety
description: Introduction to and instruction in the use of the handgun for target shooting. Major emphasis is placed on safety resulting from a thorough understanding of the operation of the firearm and the personal responsibility of each individual on the range. Class meets off campus at the Tompkins County Fish and Game Club (transportation to and from not provided).

class: PE 1520
class title: Introduction to Archery
description: Archery has a long tradition across many cultures and is a competitive sport all over the world. This class offers exposure to archery theory and shooting technique, emphasizing safe range practices, proper equipment setup, and practice shooting.

class: PE 1527
class title: Fencing
description: This course is a modern type of fencing that belongs to the family of combat sports using bladed weapons and refers to the fencing seen in most current competitions, including the Olympic Games and the World Cup. Originating in the 19th century, as a direct continuation of the 18th century French school of fencing which had in turn been influenced by the Italian school of the Renaissance. Includes warm-up exercises and all basic offensive and defensive moves.

class: PE 1540
class title: Introduction to Skating
description: For the beginning skater interested in figure skating or hockey skating. Course will cover basic skills of forward and backward skating, turns and stops, while also covering skate safety, proper fitting, and body mechanics of skating. An assessment will be done the first day of class and students grouped accordingly.
Skate rental available for $2.00 per session.

class: PE 1545
class title: Beginning Figure Skating
description: For the beginning skater or skater with no previous formal instruction. Students will learn basic forward and backward skating skills, including stopping and turning, while also covering skate safety, proper fitting, and body mechanics of skating. An assessment will be done the first day of class and students grouped accordingly. Skate rental available for $2.00 per session.

class: PE 1546
class title: Intermediate Figure Skating
description: The course will review the skills taught in the PE1540 and PE1545, as a foundation, and move into learning more advanced turns, stops, and basic jumps and spins. Course will also cover skate safety, proper fitting, and body mechanics of skating. An assessment will be done the first day of class and students grouped accordingly. Skate rental available for $2.00 per session.

class: PE 1550
class title: Introduction to Ice Hockey
description: Organized on a team practice basis. Skills to be taught include developing basic skating skills (stops, starts, forwards, backwards), basic puck skills (stick handling, shooting, passing), and team skills (breakouts, puck movement). Skates and hockey sticks must be supplied by the participants (skate rental available $2.00 per session). All other necessary equipment will be supplied by the Physical Education Department.

class: PE 1551
class title: Intermediate Ice Hockey
description: This course is designed for the intermediate hockey player. Advanced techniques taught include developing intermediate skating skills (edge work drills, crossovers, transitions), puck skills (passing-saucers, backhand, shooting-wrist, snap, backhand), and team skills (breakouts, puck movement, 5v5, 4v5). Each session emphasizes game situations and scrimmaging.

class: PE 1560
class title: Basketball
description: Fundamentals of passing, dribbling and shooting are stressed. Offensive and defensive patterns are taught. Intra-class team competition is a part of the course. It is recommended that students wear high-top basketball shoes and not running shoes for the class due to the risk of ankle injuries.

class: PE 1561
class title: Advanced Basketball
description: Advanced fundamentals of passing, dribbling, shooting, and offensive/defensive patterns are taught. Intra-class team competition is a part of the course. It is recommended that students wear high-top basketball shoes and not running shoes for the class due to the risk of ankle injuries.

class: PE 1565
class title: Soccer
description: This class will cover the fundamental skills of soccer: passing, trapping, heading, dribbling and shooting. Team tactics are covered specific to the outdoor game. 

class: PE 1570
class title: Beginning-Intermediate Volleyball
description: Fundamentals of ball handling, serves, defensive blocks, and position play are stressed. Classes scrimmage.

class: PE 1571
class title: Advanced Volleyball
description: For the experienced player. Improvement of skills through practice games and drills. Trials to check the appropriate level of ability will be held during the first class period.

class: PE 1580
class title: Principles of Weight Training
description: A comprehensive understanding of weight training and its place in the world of fitness. Topics to be covered include: selectorized equipment, free weight exercises, isometrics, circuit training, toning, stretching, strength development, and program design based on goal setting.

class: PE 1581
class title: Weight Training for Women
description: This class will focus on the basics of weight lifting. Topics covered will include: toning vs. building, theory of program design, training with dumbbells, selectorized equipment, free weight exercises for all muscle groups, flexibility, and proper nutrition for weight training.

class: PE 1582
class title: Advanced Weight Training
description: The primary focus of this course will be learning and practicing the Olympic lifts (the snatch, clean and jerk and related exercises). We will study these lifts in detail while working on building the strength and flexibility necessary for their proper performance. Additional topics will be determined based on the interests of the class. Possible topics might include: advanced programming for strength training, kettlebell training, training for sport performance, advanced muscle-building strategies and splits.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PE 1580 or at least one year of weight training experience, including familiarity with proper squat and deadlift technique.

class: PE 1584
class title: PowerBuilding
description: This course is designed to improve functional strength using barbell lifts and other associated accessories. Students should expect 30-40 minutes of coaching, during which the entire course will follow a prescribed lift. The last 10-20 minutes of class will be open gym for accessories related to the main lift. Unlike last year's 'Powerbuilding', this class will step beyond the basic four lifts and instead seek to develop goal-oriented training days focused around athletic performance. Major lifts will include the front squat, the hang clean, strict press, and multiple pull-up variations.

class: PE 1600
class title: Introduction to Aerials
description: This aerial arts course will focus on aerial fabric, as well as conditioning and flexibility training to enhance your practice and creative exercises to develop your artistry. The aerial arts get you upside down, physically engaged, and expressing yourself through a whole new medium. All levels and abilities are welcome. All students will be required to wear a mask at all times while inside for class, and will need to sign Circus Cultures Safety agreement.

class: PE 1601
class title: Backcountry Cooking
description: Tired of only eating Ramen on trips? Do you wonder about the difference between powdered cheese and real cheese? Ever wanted to learn how to make true gourmet food in the field? This course will introduce students to gourmet skills that can be used in the backcountry.

class: PE 1605
class title: Day Hiking
description: From spectacular gorges and waterfalls, to wooded ridges and glacially carved lakes, the Finger Lakes Region is justly famous for its scenery. Get off campus to discover the natural wonder surrounding us. These outings provide plenty of time to meet new friends, learn about geology, stream ecology, and the outdoor skills necessary to set out on discoveries of your own. No experience necessary.

class: PE 1608
class title: Trail Running
description: Tired of that same old route on campus? Come trail running! We'll get you out on the spectacular local trails, provide training tips, teach you how to navigate in the woods, and run you over hill and dale, through forests, fields, and mud pits! It will be a confidence-building, life-changing, attitude-adjusting experience. We'll start easy and gradually build over the duration of the course, but you should be able to run comfortably for 50 minutes. Group pace, no one will be left behind.

class: PE 1609
class title: Geocaching
description: It the world's biggest treasure hunt! You might not know it but people have been hiding boxes of treasure all over the world for you to find, even in your neighborhood. Come learn to how to find their secret locations, what do do with them, and even make one of your own. This course will introduce students to a bit of map reading and use of a GPS in a natural setting. No experience is necessary. Students should come to class prepared to be outside for the entire class length. No experience necessary.

class: PE 1610
class title: Backpacking in the Finger Lakes
description: Escape from campus to explore the glens, gorges, wooded hills, waterfalls, vistas and trails of the Finger Lakes region. Learn basic outdoor living skills, including hiking, navigation, equipment selection and use, camping, backcountry cooking, and safety.

class: PE 1613
class title: Wilderness Survival Skills
description: Learn what you can do to feel comfortable spending a night alone in the backcountry with limited resources. This course covers general backcountry safety, shelters, signaling, water and food procurement, navigation, and fire starting, as well as nature observation skills.

class: PE 1615
class title: Introduction to Circus Arts
description: The circus arts are an exciting hybrid of art and sport. In this course you'll dive deep into the basics of a multitude of circus disciplines, including juggling, stretching and conditioning, and aerial fabric and hammock. The circus arts have been proven to increase brain matter, develop executive function, improve physical fitness, build strength, and create community. No experience is necessary to participate, and all skills can be modified for different levels of fitness. Please wear clothing that allows you to go upside down comfortably. This class will take place at Circus Culture. All students will be required to wear a mask at all times while inside for class, and will need to sign Circus Cultures Safety agreement.

class: PE 1620
class title: Wilderness Advanced First Aid
description: This is a 4-day, 40 hour course accredited through the Wilderness Medical Associates. Wilderness Advanced First Aid is comprehensive medical training designed for remote professionals or wilderness leaders who venture into remote and challenging environments. Wilderness Medicine differs significantly from standard first aid courses and other training that are oriented toward urban environments. This course teaches how to manage medical emergencies when hospitals and rescue services may not be available for an extensive time period. We prepare students for emergency situations that involve prolonged patient care, severe environments, and improvised equipment. To recertify your current WAFA certification, you may retake the WAFA course or upgrade to a Wilderness First Responder (WFR) by taking a Bridge (WAFA to WFR) course.

class: PE 1621
class title: Bridge Wilderness Advanced First Aid to Wilderness First Responder
description: This is a 4-day, 40 hour course accredited through the Wilderness Medical Associates. The WAFA to WFR Bridge course upgrades the Wilderness Advanced First Aid to a Wilderness First Responder (WFR) in 4 days. This course must be taken within 3 years of receiving the WMA International WAFA certification or an equivalent from another provider. The WFR is the definitive medical training course for all outdoor professionals and enthusiasts. This course may be used as a recertification for those holding a current WFR certification or equivalent from another provider whose original WFR training was at least 64 hours in length. All eligible students who successfully complete the WAFA to WFR Bridge course will receive WMA International's Wilderness First Responder certification including anaphylaxis, and BLS/Healthcare Provider-Level CPR or equivalent. All WMA International certifications remain valid for three years. 

class: PE 1625
class title: Wilderness First Aid
description: This course focuses on essentials first with an emphasis on backcountry and wilderness issues. Includes a certificate of completion in Wilderness First Aid, as well as American Red Cross Certification in Standard First Aid and CPR. Patient assessment, body systems, equipment improvisation, trauma care, environmental medicine, toxins, backcountry medicine, and wilderness rescue are all covered. Designed for those who travel in small parties in the backcountry and who wish to be self-sufficient and well prepared, but equally useful for handling everyday medical emergencies.
prerequisites/co-requisites: No previous experience necessary. 

class: PE 1626
class title: Wilderness First Responder
description: This 8-day, 80-hour course from Wilderness Medical Associates provides the prerequisite training and certification necessary for employment as a professional outdoor instructor at nationally recognized programs such as NOLS and Outward Bound. The curriculum goes beyond the basics needed for first aid certification to emphasize the skills and knowledge needed in backcountry rescue situations when extended care may be needed.

class: PE 1627
class title: Wilderness First Responder Recertification
description: This is a 3-day, 30 hour course accredited through the Wilderness Medical Associates. The WFR Recertification course is designed to recertify and refresh current Wilderness First Responders. WMA International invites eligible WFR graduates from other wilderness medical schools to recertify with us. Students will review essential skills and wilderness protocols and will discuss relevant updates in wilderness medicine. The course focuses heavily on hands-on learning through patient assessment drills and guided discussion. To earn certification, students must meet the criteria set forth in our Functional Position Description as well as the minimum performance and testing standards by the last day of course. Upon successful completion, students will receive a Wilderness First Responder certification as well as a CPR certification equivalent to the American Heart Association's BLS CPR standard. These certifications remain valid for three years.

class: PE 1628
class title: Unicycling
description: Learn how to ride a unicycle! Often considered a circus or clown activity, unicycling is a great way to travel and an excellent test of your balance and athleticism. This course will take place at Circus Culture Ithaca's own Circus school. Students should meet at COE (B01) Bartels Hall and will be driven back and forth to Circus Culture. 

class: PE 1630
class title: Caving
description: The most exciting and unknown terrestrial frontier lies deep inside cave systems! Expand your horizons to include the netherworld. Learn cave geology, map reading skills, rope systems, cave safety, environmental concerns, and hone teamwork and communication skills in this introductory class. Expect to be challenged and inspired as you explore caves in Eastern NY. You can expect to crawl and get dirty in these wild, beautiful caves. One weekend outing include car camping.

class: PE 1640
class title: Basic Rock Climbing
description: We will introduce you to rock climbing movement and techniques, belaying, equipment, knots, rappelling, and safety. Courses ensure a high degree of individual attention and a supportive space to explore the vertical world! Graduates of this course will have the knowledge and skills to push themselves to new challenges while climbing safely and responsibly.

class: PE 1641
class title: Basic Rock Climbing: Closing the Adventure Gap
description: Adventure Gap: addressing racial disparities that cause minority populations to be much less likely to seek recreation, adventure, and solace in our wilderness spaces. Come climb with COE and take part in the Cornell climbing community! In this special section of Basic Rock Climbing we will introduce you to rock climbing movement and techniques, belaying, equipment, knots, rappelling, and safety at the Lindseth Climbing Center. In addition, we will explore identity, community, and belonging in the outdoors. Courses ensure a high degree of individual and supportive attention. Graduates of this course will build a solid foundation of skills to support future adventures in the vertical world.

class: PE 1642
class title: Women's Basic Rock Climbing
description: Join us to explore the adventure and excitement of rock climbing in a close and supportive community. We will focus on techniques to encourage efficiency, build confidence, enhance fluidity, and develop awareness. In addition to teaching skills and techniques, and providing a supportive atmosphere, we will also examine the history, challenges, development and accomplishments of women as climbers. This class is open to anyone.

class: PE 1646
class title: Intermediate Rock Climbing
description: Refine your climbing skills and get individual coaching to build your techniques on various terrain, learn how to stand on and grip more advanced holds, and expand your climbing repertoire as you piece moves together to work through tricky sequences. This course is designed for those with exposure to rock climbing basics and belay experience.This class does NOT cover the skills necessary for lead climbing.  You may consider the Sport Lead Class or a Learn to Lead Lesson.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Rock Climbing or equivalent personal experience and previous Top Rope Belay Certification at the Lindseth Climbing Center.

class: PE 1647
class title: Sport Lead Climbing
description: Sport Lead Climbing focuses on learning the skills needed to safely sport lead climb at the Lindseth Climbing Center and refine your climbing technique towards this style of climbing. Our staff will teach you about sequencing, high angle footwork, endurance and mental conditioning. If you are looking for a faster paced course, you may consider taking Learn to Lead Lesson. For more a more technique-focused course, please refer to Technique &amp; Training. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Rock Climbing or equivalent personal experience and Top Rope Belay Certification at the Lindseth Climbing Center.

class: PE 1650
class title: Rock Climbing: Technique and Training
description: Technique &amp; Training is meant for the climber who has climbing experience and is striving to reach the next level but can't quite get there on their own. This course is designed to improve your climbing technique through climbing specific training and cross-training conditioning. You will learn how to build and implement a climbing training routine, safely and effectively use a campus board and hang board, and participate in balanced muscle development to help prevent injury and keep climbing for a lifetime! Though this class meets once each week, it is expected that students will climb at least one other time during the week. This course does not cover the skills necessary for lead climbing, please refer to: Sport Lead Climbing.

class: PE 1651
class title: Introduction to Outdoor Rock Climbing
description: Learn basic rock climbing skills on real rock! We'll spend a glorious weekend climbing, tent camping, and relaxing at Minnewaska State Park in the foothills of the Catskill Mountains. We will cover climbing equipment and technique, knots, belaying, rappelling, and natural history.
prerequisites/co-requisites: No prior experience necessary.

class: PE 1653
class title: Shawangunks Rock Climbing
description: Enjoy world-class rock climbing at one of the premier areas in the US, the Shawangunks! After two introductory classes at the Lindseth Climbing Center, we will travel to the 'Gunks for 4 days of rock climbing that will teach you the skills to follow multi-pitch climbs. During fall foliage the natural beauty of the 'Gunks is superb and the climbing is some of the best in the world. A student-to-instructor ratio of 2:1 ensures individual attention and plenty of climbing for all.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Rock Climbing or equivalent experience. Top rope belay certification minimum, Lead belay certification recommended. Instructor approval required before registering (anm67@cornell.edu).

class: PE 1656
class title: Outdoor Anchor Building
description: Come learn how to build climbing anchors for your outdoor adventures! In this course you will learn anchor building best practices, get hands on use with different types of anchor building material including appropriate knots and general care, learn how to place various types of traditional protection, route finding and base management, and how to keep yourself safe while working at the edge of a cliff. We will cover trip logistics and anchor building basics in two classroom sessions and go leave campus for a weekend of building anchors, climbing, and camping!This is your opportunity to build self sufficiency and take your climbing to real rock.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic Rock Climbing or equivalent experience, Top rope belay certification minimum.

class: PE 1657
class title: Tree Climbing
description: Whether you are a rain forest canopy researcher, an arborist, or just a kid at heart, everyone loves to climb trees. Recall the excitement and sense of adventure when you first crawled into the branches to look inside a bird's nest. Then you swung from limb to limb without a thought of ropes and harnesses. But what about that big tree down the street you always wanted to climb, but couldn't reach the first branch? This course will teach you how to use ropes and technical climbing gear to reach the top of any tree, to move around, and even to climb from tree to tree without returning to the ground.

class: PE 1663
class title: Ropes Course Programming
description: Students learn and apply the technical, safety, leadership and facilitation skills essential to safe and effective ropes course programming. Technical skills such as knot tying, challenge course belaying, and more will be taught during this course. Students will learn low ropes team integration activities as well as high ropes facilitation skills. This course can contribute towards the completion of the CU Leadership Minor. The course will be taught at the Hoffman Challenge Course, with transportation provided.
prerequisites/co-requisites: No previous experience. Some physical ability required.

class: PE 1664
class title: Mountain Biking
description: Mountain Biking is for those who want to learn the skills to ride a bike on single track trails. Skills on the bike include body position, braking, shifting, descending, climbing and navigating natural terrain such as rocks, roots and logs. You will also learn to complete a bike safety check, change a flat tire and navigate on the trails. Classes will take place at different trail systems. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ability to comfortably ride a bike. Mountain Biking is geared towards beginning mountain bikers, but it takes place on narrow, uneven trails and basic bike handling skills are a must. You can expect ride 5-10 miles a day on average.

class: PE 1670
class title: Adirondack Canoe Camping
description: Experience the Adirondacks at their finest during Fall Break. Encounter first hand what makes this place so spectacular: magnificent mountain landscapes scattered with changing fall colors, numerous lakes and waterways to paddle, starry skies to camp out under and the call of loons as they echo across the lakes. Your instructors will teach you the skills you will need to have an enjoyable canoe camping experience including paddling technique, portaging (carrying boats &amp; gear between lakes), navigation, backcountry cooking, and various other canoe camping skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: recreational swimmer.

class: PE 1671
class title: Recreational Canoeing
description: This course is designed to teach you the fundamentals of canoeing in a relaxed environment. Appreciate being outside for class as you explore Beebe Lake and other Finger Lakes area waterways. Meet new friends, learn new skills, and experience nature all while you keep active. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: recreational swimmer.

class: PE 1674
class title: Introduction to Sea Kayaking
description: Learn the basics to get you started with sea kayaking out on the lake. This course covers information about equipment, loading, launching &amp; landing your kayak, exiting and re-entering your kayak in open water, and basic paddling stroke technique. Practice skills in the pool, spend a day paddling out on the lake and participate in a weekend camping trip where you paddle out to a primitive campsite carrying all of you gear in your kayak.

class: PE 1675
class title: Stand Up Paddleboarding
description: Try paddling standing up! We are excited to show you how much fun you can have on stand up paddleboards. Experience Cayuga Lake from a new vantage point. Stay active and engage your whole body. Learn something fun in a small group setting. Our instructors will teach you all the basics including: stance, paddling technique, turning, and more. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: recreational swimmer.

class: PE 1680
class title: Pool Paddling
description: Learn the fundamentals of kayaking in the controlled environment of the pool. This course will give you a solid progression of skills that will be easily transferable to an open water or river experience. Learn and practice a wide range of skills in whitewater kayaks including fundamental paddling strokes, bracing, rolling and boat handling skills like edging and carving. Paddling games and focused exercises will provide a fun and interactive group learning experience.

class: PE 1681
class title: Whitewater Kayaking Beginners
description: This introductory course starts out in the pool where you will learn boat control and wet exits and progresses to moving water where you will learn the dynamics of a river and basic river safety.  During the course you will practice boat handling skills including edging, bracing, rolling, and paddle strokes. Kayaking on the river will give you the opportunity to learn how to read the water and practice maneuvering across current with ferries, eddy turns, and peel outs. River destinations will be dependent on river levels. This class culminates in a weekend camping trip with two days of paddling on class II/III whitewater.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: strong recreational swimmer.

class: PE 1700
class title: Outdoor Tai Chi
description: In conjunction with the Ithaca Tai Chi society this course will expose students to the numerous benefits of learning the ancient art of Tai Chi Chuan. Students should dress appropriately for the weather as all classes will be held outside. No previous experience necessary. 

class: PE 1702
class title: Outdoor Yoga
description: This course, an introduction to Yoga, takes place at various places on and off campus. Students will gain a greater awareness of their movements and breathing, improved flexibility, fitness, strength, and wellness in a relaxing outdoor setting. As always, come prepared for the weather.

class: PE 1851
class title: Leadership Laboratory I
description: MILS I cadets meet for eight hours each month to learn a variety of military skills including rappelling, first aid, drill and ceremonies, weapons familiarization, physical fitness training, and small group leadership.

class: PE 1852
class title: Leadership Laboratory II
description: Cadets meet for eight hours each month as members of the cadet organization to participate in practical leadership exercises. Types of practical activities include rifle marksmanship, orienteering, drill and ceremonies, signal communications, physical fitness training, first aid, tactics, field exercises, and small group leadership.

class: PE 1853
class title: Leadership Laboratory III
description: Cadets meet for eight hours each month to prepare for a five-week summer camp that follows their junior year. Emphasis is placed on the development of individual practical and leadership skills. Cadets rotate through leadership positions to practice applying decision-making skills in a myriad of situations.

class: PE 1854
class title: Leadership Laboratory IV
description: Senior cadets plan and operate the leadership laboratory programs for MILS I-III cadets. The development of planning and supervisory skills is emphasized. Cadets have an opportunity to practice leadership skills developed during previous ROTC training and summer camp experiences. Includes two to three hours a week devoted to physical fitness.

class: PE 1860
class title: Initial Military Experiences I
description: Introduction to the responsibilities, life, and work of an Air Force officer. Basic knowledge of drill and ceremonies, military courtesies, and the wearing of the uniform.

class: PE 1862
class title: Intermediate Military Experiences I
description: Designed to help students develop skill in giving commands for drill and ceremonies. Students are also introduced to the Air Force base environment in which the officer functions. Career areas available based on academic majors are described. Students participate in military drills and ceremonies.

class: PE 1864
class title: Junior Officer Leadership Experiences I
description: Cadets assume leadership responsibilities similar to those of a junior officer. Emphasis is on the importance of applying effective human relations skills in dealing with superiors, peers, and subordinates. Cadets also gain insight into the general structure and progression patterns of selected Air Force officer career fields.

class: PE 1866
class title: Advanced Leadership Experiences
description: Cadets assume command leadership responsibilities to operate a military organization. Cadets apply effective leadership and managerial techniques with individuals and groups and participate in self-analysis of leadership and managerial abilities.

class: PE 1870
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: PE 1872
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: PE 1874
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: PE 1876
class title: Naval Professional Laboratory
description: All students in the program participate in a two-hour professional development session each week. The session is held from 2:30 until 4:30 on Wednesday afternoons and consists of drill, athletics, and professional information events. Students gain experience in actual leadership situations and learn the fundamentals of seamanship, military formations, movements, commands, discipline, courtesies, and honors. During information briefings, special emphasis is given to applied leadership as it relates to the administrative and managerial aspects of a Navy or Marine Corps officer's duties.

class: PE 1940
class title: Varsity Sport

class: PERSN 1320
class title: Elementary Persian-Farsi I
description: Intended for beginners and heritage speakers alike, this course is a quick and easy way to a popular worldly language in a modern day context (Farsi)!  Students develop all four skills - speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Additional materials from authentic culture-focused readings and Persian poetry are an integral part of the curriculum. By the end of this course students will be able to actively participate in conversations centered around family and friends, hometown, country, studies and work, daily activities, modern Iran as well as write extensively on familiar topics. Students will acquire cultural competence and be able to function in authentic Persian cultural context using the taarof.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: PERSN 1322
class title: Intermediate Persian-Farsi I
description: The course is designed with strong integration of modern colloquial Persian (Farsi). Only colloquial Persian is used for all speaking and listening activities, while reading and writing tasks are performed in formal Persian. Authentic material drawn from Persian language TV, radio and movies is introduced regularly in accordance with the topic and vocabulary of given week.  By the end of the semester students will be able to speak, read and comprehend material on a range of social, cultural, political and everyday topics. You'll learn how to write emails and notes as educated Persian speakers, read Persian newspapers and comprehend audio material intended for native speakers. We'll also delve into Persian folk tales, modern Persian rap and pop and Persian humor.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year (two semesters) elementary Persian, equivalent proficiency (including heritage speakers), or permission of instructor.

class: PERSN 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Persian
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: PHIL 1100
class title: Introduction to Philosophy
description: A general introduction to some of the main topics, texts, and methods of philosophy. Topics may include the existence of God, the nature of mind and its relation to the body, causation, free will, knowledge and skepticism, and justice and moral obligation. Readings may be drawn from the history of philosophy and contemporary philosophical literature.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 1110
class title: FWS: Philosophy in Practice
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar is about using philosophy and everyday life and provides the opportunity to write extensively about these issues.  Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PHIL 1111
class title: FWS: Philosophical Problems
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar discusses problems in philosophy and gives the opportunity to write about them.  Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PHIL 1112
class title: FWS: Philosophical Conversations
description: This First-Year Writing Seminar offers the opportunity to discuss and write about philosophy.  Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PHIL 1620
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 1621
class title: WIM: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This section is highly recommended for students who are interested in learning about the topics covered in the main course through writing and discussion. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHIL 1620.

class: PHIL 1650
class title: Philosophy of Race
description: This course offers an introduction to the philosophy of race. It canvasses key debates in the field concerning the metaphysical status of race, the relationship between the concept of race and racism (and the nature of the latter), the first-person reality of race, and the connections and disconnections between racial, ethnic, and national identities.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 1950
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PHIL 1960
class title: Law, Society, and Morality
description: An introduction to leading topics in legal theory and political philosophy such as: what the laws should be, how they shape and are shaped by society, how they are and should be interpreted, the proper role of ethical and religious outlooks in lawmaking, the obligation to obey the law, and the relationship between private life and public legislation.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 2200
class title: Greek and Roman Philosophy
description: An introductory survey of ancient Greek philosophy from the so-called Presocratics (6th century BCE) through the Hellenistic period (1st century BCE) with special emphasis on the thought of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, HST-AS) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 2260
class title: Slavery in Philosophy
description: This course examines slavery as a topic of philosophical analysis. Surveying a range of ancient and modern discourses, we will think together about the following questions: What is slavery? What is a slave? Who can be a slave? Why does slavery exist? What is the relationship between slavery and race? Slavery and gender? Slavery and religion? We will encounter several views on these questions, paying close attention to the ways they emerged in their historical contexts. We will begin with a study of slavery in the ancient world, focusing on Greece and Rome. Ancient Greek and Roman accounts of slavery and freedom form much of the foundation for how slavery was understood in the medieval and early modern world. These beginnings will give us the conceptual tools necessary for us to analyze and understand the enslavement of Indigenous peoples and Africans by Europeans and the American anti-slavery movement. The course ends by considering slavery's enduring legacy in the modern university.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: PHIL 2310
class title: Introduction to Deductive Logic
description: Covers sentential languages, the truth-functional connectives, and their logic; first-order languages, the quantifiers "every" and "some," and their logic.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: PHIL 2410
class title: Ethics
description: This will be a lecture course on classic and contemporary work on central topics in ethics. The first third of the course will focus on metaethics: we will examine the meaning of moral claims and ask whether there is any sense in which moral principles are objectively valid. The second third of the course will focus on normative ethics: what makes our lives worth living, what makes our actions right or wrong, and what do we owe to others? The final third of the course will focus on moral character: what is moral praiseworthiness, and how important is it? Can we be held responsible for what we do? When and why?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 2430
class title: Moral Dilemmas in the Law
description: The course concerns the principles and philosophical arguments underlying conflicts and moral dilemmas of central and ongoing concern to society as they arise within legal contexts. We consider questions such as what justifies using state power to punish people for wrongdoing, what kinds of conduct are rightly criminalized, what justifies the Supreme Court's power to strike down Congressional legislation, what justifies the right to private property and its boundaries, what is the right to privacy and why it is important, what are human rights, and what is the morality and law of war. Throughout we will be reading legal cases and philosophical commentaries that engage with the deep issues that the cases pose.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 2621
class title: Minds and Machines
description: Throughout history, metaphors drawn from technology of the time have been proposed to understand how the mind works. While Locke likened the newborn's mind to a blank slate, Freud compared the mind to hydraulic and electro-magnetic systems. More recently, many have endorsed Turing's proposal that the mind is a computer. Why is this idea attractive and what exactly is a computer? Is it at all plausible that the cells of your brain are computing? Could a computer ever really have a mind, beliefs, emotions and conscious experiences? What are these mysterious things anyway? Could a machine ever count as a person and make choices based on its own free will? Is it really so clear that we have this kind of free will?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 2965
class title: Ecological Justice: Feminist, Queer, and Trans Perspectives
description: This course is an in-depth study of ecological justice from feminist, queer, and trans perspectives. Historically, people marginalized by race, gender, sexuality, disability, and poverty have borne the brunt of environmental degradation. But they have also led environmental movements and ecological theorizing around the globe. Drawing on the traditions of ecofeminism, racial justice, queer and trans ecology, and disability theory, students will learn how feminist, queer, and trans thinking has reshaped binaries at the heart of environmental ethics, including nature/artifice, human/animal, stranger/kin, science/poetics, and activism/daily life. As such, students will deepen their knowledge of intersectional justice within a more-than-human world.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: PHIL 2990
class title: Foundations of Law and Society
description: This course explores the meaning of Law and Society, which is an interdisciplinary study of the interactive nature of legal and social forces. A law and society perspective places law in its historical, social, and cultural context, studying the dynamic way in which law shapes social norms, policy, and institutions, and conversely, the way that social forces shape the law. This Foundations of Law and Society course is structured as a series of four modules, each taught by a faculty member from a different discipline. The modules will introduce students to a range of disciplinary methods and content related to the study of the interaction of law with social, political, and economic institutions and relationships.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PHIL 3180
class title: Origins of 20th Century Philosophy
description: In this course, we will consider some philosophical writings from the last third of the 19th century through the early 20th century that are both of interest in themselves and helped shape philosophical work up to today. We will also read some more recent writings that address issues raised by material from that target period.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one previous course in philosophy.

class: PHIL 3300
class title: Introduction to Set Theory
description: This will be a course on standard set theory (first developed by Ernst Zermelo early in the 20th century): the basic concepts of sethood and membership, operations on sets, functions as sets, the set-theoretic construction of the Natural Numbers, the Integers, the Rational and Real numbers; time permitting, some discussion of cardinality.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)

class: PHIL 3480
class title: Philosophy of Law
description: This will be a class on various topics in the philosophy of law. Some questions we'll be considering: What is law? Do laws have moral content? What is the proper role of judges in interpreting the law? What do alternatives to our legal system look like? Is there an obligation to obey the law? Might there sometimes be an obligation to disobey the law? What, if anything, justifies punishment by the state? What counts has having an excuse for wrongdoing? What counts as good evidence of guilt? What are the justifications for and limits of the right to free speech? When, if ever, is paternalistic interference by the state into the lives of its citizens justified? And what special ethical problems do practicing lawyers face?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one previous course in philosophy.

class: PHIL 3830
class title: Decision Theory
description: This course delves into decision theory.  We shall be concerned with a fundamental normative question: what ought one to do, given what one believes and values.  Our focus, throughout, will be on philosophical questions and not on applications.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in Philosophy.

class: PHIL 3900
class title: Independent Study
description: To be taken only in exceptional circumstances. Must be arranged by the student with his or her advisor and the faculty member who has agreed to direct the study.

class: PHIL 4002
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: PHIL 4200
class title: Topics in Ancient Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of topics in ancient philosophy. Topics vary by instructors.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, HST-AS) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in philosophy.

class: PHIL 4310
class title: Mathematical Logic
description: First course in mathematical logic providing precise definitions of the language of mathematics and the notion of proof (propositional and predicate logic). The completeness theorem says that we have all the rules of proof we could ever have. The Gödel incompleteness theorem says that they are not enough to decide all statements even about arithmetic. The compactness theorem exploits the finiteness of proofs to show that theories have unintended (nonstandard) models. Possible additional topics: the mathematical definition of an algorithm and the existence of noncomputable functions; the basics of set theory to cardinality and the uncountability of the real numbers.
distribution categories: (SMR-AS)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2210, MATH 2230, MATH 2310, MATH 2940, or equivalent.

class: PHIL 4490
class title: Feminism and Philosophy
description: Feminist approaches to questions in metaphysics, epistemology, language, and value theory.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one philosophy course or one course in feminist theory (FGSS).

class: PHIL 4495
class title: Trans Theory and the Question of Gender
description: The question "What is gender?" is an increasingly thorny and political one. This course provides students with an advanced introduction to debates about the nature and function of gender in contemporary trans theory and trans philosophy. Throughout the seminar, we will analyze various definitions of gender offered by trans thinkers: gender as genus, as genre, as performance, as self-identity, and as colonial category. We will critically assess the value and limitations of key gender terms such as cisgender, genderqueer, nonbinary, and transgender. Finally, we will grapple with the current debate about whether to abolish gender or to richly celebrate gender diversity.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS) (D-AG)

class: PHIL 4611
class title: Topics in Action Theory
description: Advanced discussion of a topic in philosophical action theory.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PHIL 4710
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: PHIL 4730
class title: Semantics I
description: Introduces methods for theorizing about meaning within generative grammar. These techniques allow the creation of grammars that pair syntactic structures with meanings. Students look at several empirical areas in detail, among them complementation (combining heads with their arguments), modification, conjunction, definite descriptions, relative clauses, traces, bound pronouns, and quantification. An introduction to logical and mathematical concepts used in linguistic semantics (e.g., set theory, functions and their types, and the lambda notation for naming linguistic meanings) is included in the course.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SMR-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LING 3303 or permission of instructor.

class: PHIL 4900
class title: Informal Study for Honors I
description: Majors in philosophy may choose to pursue writing of an honors thesis in their senior year. Students undertake research leading to the writing of an honors essay by the end of the final semester. Prospective candidates should apply at the Department of Philosophy office, 218 Goldwin Smith Hall.

class: PHIL 4901
class title: Informal Study for Honors II
description: Majors in philosophy may choose to pursue writing of an honors thesis in their senior year. Students undertake research leading to the writing of an honors essay by the end of the final semester. Prospective candidates should apply at the Department of Philosophy office, 218 Goldwin Smith Hall.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 4900.

class: PHIL 6010
class title: Greek Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Greek Philosophical texts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of Greek is essential.

class: PHIL 6020
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: PHIL 6040
class title: French Philosophical Texts

class: PHIL 6100
class title: Pro Seminar in Philosophy
description: Seminar for first year Philosophy graduate students.

class: PHIL 6200
class title: Topics in Ancient Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of topics in ancient philosophy. Topics vary by instructors. 

class: PHIL 6290
class title: Proseminar in the History of Philosophy
description: An introduction to current research in the history of philosophy primarily through engagement with a variety of presentations of such research by Cornell faculty, visiting scholars, and advanced graduate students doing dissertation-level work. Each seminar meeting will involve a viva voce presentation of a current paper or research project. Students in the course will be expected to engage in both critical discussion of the work presented and reflection on the practices and methodologies exemplified in that work. Advanced graduate students in the course will be expected to present work of their own. Exposure to a variety of scholars and their work and the opportunity for explicit reflection on scholarly practices will enable students to develop and refine their own research in the history of philosophy.

class: PHIL 6311
class title: Topics in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics
description: Advanced discussion of a topic in logic or foundational mathematics. Topics vary by instructor. For descriptions of each topic, please visit the university class roster.

class: PHIL 6417
class title: Moral Foundations of Anti-Discrimination
description: What makes discrimination wrongful, when it is? Does its wrongness depend on social context and historical background? Does it depend on harmful consequences? What makes a certain ground of discrimination an improper ground? Is indirect discrimination ("disparate impact") really a form of discrimination or perhaps a mild form of affirmative action? What should be the reach and scope of anti-discrimination law? Should it allow for exemptions on religious or free speech grounds? We will address these and similar questions at a fairly abstract level, trying to understand the philosophical principles that might explain the various aspects of anti-discrimination law. Most of the legal examples will be focused on discrimination cases in the context of employment and service provision (Title VII),  but we will also consider racial profiling, disability cases, and some others. 

class: PHIL 6430
class title: Topics in Social and Political Philosophy
description: Advanced discussion of a topic in social and political philosophy.

class: PHIL 6490
class title: Feminism and Philosophy
description: Feminist approaches to questions in metaphysics, epistemology, language, and value theory.

class: PHIL 6611
class title: Topics in Action Theory
description: Advanced discussion of a topic in philosophical action theory.

class: PHIL 6710
class title: Topics in the Philosophy of Language
description: An investigation of varying topics in the philosophy of language including reference, meaning, the relationship between language and thought, communication, modality, logic and pragmatics.

class: PHIL 6730
class title: Semantics I
description: Introduces methods for theorizing about meaning within generative grammar. These techniques allow the creation of grammars that pair syntactic structures with meanings. Students look at several empirical areas in detail, among them complementation (combining heads with their arguments), modification, conjunction, definite descriptions, relative clauses, traces, bound pronouns, and quantification. An introduction to logical and mathematical concepts used in linguistic semantics (e.g., set theory, functions and their types, and the lambda notation for naming linguistic meanings) is included in the course.

class: PHIL 6740
class title: Semantics Seminar
description: Addresses current theoretical and empirical issues in semantics.

class: PHIL 6922
class title: Foundations of the Social Sciences
description: Social science research almost always combines empirical observation (data), the construction of concepts (language), and the logical analysis of the relations between observations and concepts (statistics).  This course examines the relations between these three dimensions as the analyst moves from one to the other both as practice and in the crafting of a formal summary of findings and argument. We will be particularly interested in the foundational assumptions that underpin the connections between empirical reality, language, and statistical analysis. While these foundational assumptions are often taken for granted by social scientists, they vary dramatically between social science disciplines.  The implicit contradiction between that variance and their doxic acceptance within disciplines will be a primary focus of the course.

class: PHIL 7000
class title: Informal Study
description: Independent study for graduate students only.

class: PHIL 7900
class title: Placement Seminar
description: This course is designed to help prepare Philosophy graduate students for the academic job market. Though students will study sample materials from successful job applicants, much of the seminar will function as a workshop, providing them with in-depth feedback on multiple drafts of their job materials. Interview skills will be practiced in every seminar meeting. The seminar meetings will be supplemented with individual conferences with the placement mentor, and students should also share copies of their job materials with their dissertation committees.

class: PHIL 7950
class title: Philosophy Discussion Club Colloquium
description: Invited talks in philosophy given by both outside speakers and members of the Cornell community. Enrollment for credit is required for first- and second-year philosophy graduate students.

class: PHYS 1012
class title: Physics 1112 Supplement
description: Provides auxiliary instruction and practice for PHYS 1112 and promotes a deep understanding of basic concepts in mechanics. Recommended for students who seek additional opportunities to engage with course content, to gain confidence in applying physics principals, or to develop their problem-solving skills. Class time is also spent exploring real-life applications and discussing strategies for successful learning and performance in PHYS 1112 .              

class: PHYS 1013
class title: Physics 2213 Supplement
description: Provides auxiliary instruction and practice for PHYS 2213 and promotes a deep understanding of basic concepts in electromagnetism. Recommended for students who seek additional opportunities to engage with course content, to gain confidence in applying physics principals, or to develop their problem-solving skills. Class time is also spent exploring real-life applications and discussing strategies for successful learning and performance in PHYS 2213 .

class: PHYS 1101
class title: General Physics I
description: PHYS 1101 and PHYS 1102 emphasize both quantitative and conceptual understanding of the topics and tools of introductory physics developed without the use of calculus. The courses offer individualized instruction. Students learn through completing assigned readings, problems, and laboratory exercises, and through individualized tutoring. Additionally, recorded lectures, overview sessions, short videos, sample tests, and online tutorials are provided. The course format provides flexibility, but in some ways is more demanding than a course with a traditional format. Success requires discipline and well-developed study habits. Students without high school physics should allow extra time. Evaluation includes an oral lab check, a selection of graded homework problems, and a written test for each unit; these must be completed within a flexible set of deadlines. Major topics for PHYS 1101: forces and equilibrium, kinematics, dynamics, momentum, energy, fluid mechanics, waves and sound, thermal physics, and thermodynamics. At the level of College Physics, 5th edition, by Giambattista.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: three years of high school mathematics, including trigonometry.

class: PHYS 1110
class title: Introduction to Experimental Physics
description: This laboratory course is an introduction to the nature and skills of experimentation in physics. Students will engage in multi-week investigations, creatively design their own experiments, and explore questions of how we develop models in physics through experiments. Students will learn how to design experiments, analyze data, develop interesting research questions, and consider issues of ethics in physics experiments. Students will also develop communication and collaboration skills. The course aims to provide an opportunity for students to consider the nature of measurement and experimentation and evaluate the relationship between physical theories and experimental data.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHYS 1112 or PHYS 1116, or PHYS 2213 or PHYS 2217, or if you have AP, Advanced Standing Exam, or transfer credit without lab credit for these courses. Students who take PHYS 1110 with PHYS 1112 or PHYS 1116 will not need to re-take PHYS 1110 with PHYS 2213 or PHYS 2217 .

class: PHYS 1112
class title: Physics I: Mechanics and Heat
description: First course in a three-semester introductory physics sequence. This course is taught in a largely "flipped', highly interactive manner, with reading preparation and online reading quizzes required for class. Covers the mechanics of particles with focus on kinematics, dynamics, conservation laws, central force fields, periodic motion.&amp;nbsp;Mechanics of many-particle systems: center of mass, rotational mechanics of a rigid body, translational &amp; rotational equilibrium. Temperature, heat, the laws of thermodynamics. At the level of University Physics, Vol. 1, by Young and Freedman.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1910 or MATH 1120. Recommended corequisite: MATH 1920 in order to continue with PHYS 2213 the following semester. Corequisite: PHYS 1110 must be taken to remain enrolled in PHYS 1112. MATH 1910 may be allowed by instructor in exceptional cases, but continuation in PHYS 2213 will then have to be deferred until MATH 1920 is completed.

class: PHYS 1116
class title: Physics I: Mechanics and Special Relativity
description: First in a three-semester introductory physics sequence. Explores quantitative modeling of the physical world through a study of mechanics. More mathematical than a typical mechanics course - for example, considers how choice of coordinate system (Cartesian, cylindrical, etc.) influences the nature of kinematical equations. Includes kinematics, dynamics, conservation laws, central force fields, periodic motion, and special relativity. At the level of An Introduction to Mechanics by Kleppner and Kolenkow, which assumes a strong mathematical foundation in calculus.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHYS 1110 must be taken to remain enrolled in PHYS 1116. Prerequisite: students must have Calculus II credit (AP Calculus BC, MATH 1910, MATH 1120, or equivalent). A strong high school math and physics course background (at the AP/IB level or equivalent) is expected.

class: PHYS 1190
class title: Introductory Laboratory (Transfer Supplement)
description: Students perform the laboratory component of one of the introductory courses ( PHYS 1101 , PHYS 1102 , PHYS 2207, PHYS 2208,  PHYS 2214) to complement the lecture-related course credit acquired elsewhere. Those wishing to take equivalent of one of these introductory courses at another institution should receive prior approval from the physics director of undergraduate studies.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: three transfer credits for introductory physics lecture material and a degree requirement for laboratory component of that introductory course.

class: PHYS 1201
class title: Why the Sky Is Blue: Aspects of the Physical World
description: One of the existential problems of our time is telling the difference between something that is fake and something that is real. Physics can be a powerful tool for making such distinctions because it provides physical laws that cannot be violated. In this class you will learn about these laws and how to use them to analyze everyday phenomena. Aimed specifically at the nonscience student, this course will examine the principles of physics from a conceptual point of view, with emphasis on the methodology of science and the nature of evidence. 
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PHYS 1205
class title: The Physics of Sailing
description: This course teaches quantitative reasoning by combining the science and technology of sailboats with an outdoors experience of its practical application. A basic mathematics and physics education is a prerequisite. Topics will include: wind power, boat types, sail plans, winches and pulleys; keels; propelling and resistive forces; water waves and hull speed; real and apparent wind velocity; the wind rose; weather formations; heaving to and storm techniques; knots and why they work; and water waves. Experimental projects performed on Cayuga Lake include measuring phase and group velocities, the wind rose, and the hull speed, to compare to data sheets.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must be able to swim (75 yds or equivalent to university swim test requirement).

class: PHYS 2207
class title: Fundamentals of Physics I
description: Physics 2207-PHYS 2208 is a two-semester introductory physics sequence with lab. The first course, Physics 2207, builds the foundations for quantitatively modeling the world around us and reasoning about physical phenomena. These skills are developed in the context of mechanics, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and waves.  Includes applications from the sciences, medicine, and everyday life.  Taught at the level of "College Physics" by Knight, Jones, and Field.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: high school physics plus MATH 1110 or MATH 1106, or solid understanding of the basic concepts of introductory calculus.

class: PHYS 2210
class title: Exploring Experimental Physics
description: In this laboratory course, students will build on the knowledge and skills developed in Physics 1110 (Introduction to Experimental Physics) to conduct semester-long experimental physics projects. Students will work in lab project teams to iteratively develop a research question, write a proposal that is reviewed by their peers and experts, engage for multiple weeks with their project, and present their findings in a public poster session at the end of the semester. Students will learn additional skills in experimental design and data analysis, with broader focuses on how to generate interesting, testable, and feasible research questions, how to provide critical and constructive feedback to others, and how to present research to a broad audience. The course provides an early opportunity for students to get a glimpse of experimental physics research, employ creativity to generate an answer to a novel research question and/or design a unique experimental approach.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHYS 2218.

class: PHYS 2213
class title: Physics II: Electromagnetism
description: Second course in a three semester introductory physics sequence. The course emphasizes active learning during class. Video lectures are viewed before class; most class time is devoted to problem-solving.  Topics include: electric forces and fields, electric energy and potential, circuits, magnetic forces and fields, magnetic induction, and Maxwell's equations. Taught at a level somewhat higher than University Physics, Vol. 2, by Young and Freedman. The math prerequisite is essential: line, surface, and volume integrals are done routinely and occasional use is made of gradient, divergence, and curl.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112 (or strong performance in PHYS 2207) and one of MATH 1920, MATH 2220, or MATH 2240.

class: PHYS 2214
class title: Physics III: Oscillations, Waves, and Quantum Physics
description: For majors in engineering (including bio-, civil, and environmental engineering), computer and information science, physics, earth and atmospheric science, and other physical and biological sciences who wish to understand the oscillation, wave, and quantum phenomena behind everyday experiences and modern technology including scientific/medical instrumentation. Covers the physics of oscillations and wave phenomena, including driven oscillations and resonance, mechanical waves, sound waves, electromagnetic waves, standing waves, Doppler effect, polarization, wave reflection and transmission, interference, diffraction, geometric optics and optical instruments, wave properties of particles, particles in potential wells, light emission and absorption, and quantum tunneling. With applications to phenomena and measurement technologies in engineering, the physical sciences, and biological sciences.  Some familiarity with differential equations, complex representation of sinusoids, and Fourier analysis is desirable but not essential. As with PHYS 1112 and PHYS 2213, pre-class preparation involves reading notes and/or watching videos, and in-class activities focus on problem solving, demonstrations, and applications.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2213 (or strong performance in PHYS 2208), plus vector calculus at the level of one of the following: MATH 1920, MATH 2220, or MATH 2240.

class: PHYS 2216
class title: Introduction to Special Relativity
description: Introduction to Einstein's Theory of Special Relativity, including Galilean and Lorentz transformations, the concept of simultaneity, time dilation and Lorentz contraction, the relativistic transformations of velocity, momentum and energy, and relativistic invariance in the laws of physics. At the level of An Introduction to Mechanics by Kleppner and Kolenkow.
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1112 or PHYS 2207 or permission of instructor.

class: PHYS 2217
class title: Physics II: Electricity and Magnetism
description: Second in a three semester introductory physics sequence. Explores quantitative modeling of the physical world through a study of electricity and magnetism. More mathematical and abstract than a typical introductory electricity and magnetism course. Topics include electrostatics, behavior of matter in electric fields, circuits, magnetic fields, Faraday's law, AC circuits, and electromagnetic waves. Makes substantial use of vector calculus. At the level of Electricity and Magnetism by Purcell.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1110 with PHYS 1112, PHYS 1116, PHYS 2213, for students matriculating Fall 2021 or later, to complete the required sequence; Vector calculus at the level of MATH 1920, MATH 2220, or MATH 2240. Mathematics prerequisites can be waived at discretion of instructor.

class: PHYS 2218
class title: Physics III: Waves and Thermal Physics
description: This course is divided into two parts. The larger segment of the course typically focuses on wave phenomena. Topics include: coupled harmonic oscillators, strings, sound and light waves, superposition principle, wave equations, Fourier series and transforms, diffraction and interference. The discussion is at the level of The Physics of Waves by Georgi. The second segment of the course covers thermodynamics and statistical mechanics at the level of Thermal Physics by Schroeder.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHYS 2210 must be taken to remain enrolled in PHYS 2218. Prerequisite: PHYS 2217 or very strong performance in PHYS 2213. Students would benefit from prior exposure to differential equations at the level of MATH 2930 or from concurrent enrollment in that course. Some linear algebra may be used, either prior or concurrent enrollment in linear algebra is recommended (MATH 2940, MATH 2210, or MATH 2230).

class: PHYS 3310
class title: Intermediate Experimental Physics
description: Would you find it appealing to operate a physical system that allows you to sharply distinguishes between rational and irrational numbers? How about using a microwave thermometer to measure the temperature of a distant object namely the sun's outer surface? Would you like to measure fundamentals of nature, such as the charge to mass ratio of the electron, or the atomic structure of Hydrogen? In Physics 3310, you will have experiences such as these as you decide for yourself how valid or applicable various theoretical results are that you have already encountered or look forward to encountering in 3000 level intermediate level courses such as  quantum and classical mechanics and electrodynamics. You'll acquire  essential skills to tease out the truth about nature as an experimental physicist with particular emphasis on the awareness and management of uncertainty. The environment of 3310 promotes individual creativity and discovery with the encouragement and aid of coursemates and staff.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2208 or PHYS 2214 or PHYS 2218.

class: PHYS 3316
class title: Basics of Quantum Mechanics
description: Topics include breakdown of classical concepts in microphysics; light quanta and matter waves; Schrödinger equation and solutions for square well, harmonic oscillator, and the hydrogen atom; wave packets, scattering and tunneling effects, angular momentum, spin, and magnetic moments. At the level of An Introduction to Quantum Physics by French and Taylor and Introduction to Quantum Physics by Griffiths.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2214 or PHYS 2218; PHYS 1116 or PHYS 2216; and coregistration in MATH 2940 or  MATH 2210 or MATH 2230.

class: PHYS 3317
class title: Applications of Quantum Mechanics
description: Covers a number of applications of quantum mechanics to topics in modern physics. Uses the tools developed in PHYS 3316 , and does not introduce new formalism. Topics include the physics of single and multi-electron atoms, molecular physics, introduction to quantum statistics, topics in solid-state physics, nuclear structure, and elementary particle physics. Students will develop their order-of-magnitude reasoning and their modeling skills.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 3316.

class: PHYS 3327
class title: Advanced Electricity and Magnetism
description: Focuses on advanced electro/magnetostatics, such as vector and scalar potentials and multipole expansion of the potential solutions to Laplace's Equation and boundary value problems, as well as time-dependent electrodynamics: Maxwell's Equations, electromagnetic waves, reflection and refraction, wave guides, and generation of electromagnetic radiation (retarded potential). As time permits, topics will be drawn from antennas, relativistic electrodynamics, four vectors, Lorentz, and transformation of fields based on the interest of the class. At the level of Classical Electromagnetic Radiation by Heald and Marion or the more advanced chapters of Introduction to Electrodynamics by Griffiths.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SMR-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2217/PHYS 2218, or PHYS 2213/PHYS 2214. Recommended prerequisite: AEP 3200. Corequisite: AEP 4200 or appropriate mathematics course(s) that cover complex analysis, vector calculus, Fourier transforms and techniques for studying boundary value problems recommended.

class: PHYS 3360
class title: Electronic Circuits
description: Practical electronics as encountered in a scientific or engineering research/development environment. Analyze, design, build, and test circuits using discrete components and integrated circuits. Analog circuits: resistors, capacitors, operational amplifiers, feedback amplifiers, oscillators, comparators, passive and active filters, diodes, and transistor switches and amplifiers. Digital circuits: combinational and sequential logic (gates, flipflops, registers, counters, timers), analog to digital (ADC) and digital to analog (DAC) conversion, signal averaging, and computer architecture and interfacing. Additional topics may include analog and digital signal processing, light wave communications, transducers, noise reduction techniques, and computer-aided circuit design. At the level of Art of Electronics by Horowitz and Hill.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate course in electricity and magnetism (e.g., PHYS 2208, PHYS 2213, or PHYS 2217) or permission of instructor.

class: PHYS 4230
class title: Statistical Thermodynamics
description: Quantum statistical basis for equilibrium thermodynamics, microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles, and partition functions. Classical and quantum ideal gases, paramagnetic and multiple-state systems. Maxwell-Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and Bose-Einstein statistics and applications. Introduction to systems of interacting particles. At the level of Introductory Statistical Mechanics by Bowley and Sanchez.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: junior level quantum mechanics, electricity and magnetism, and mathematics at the level of  AEP 3610, AEP 3550, AEP 3200 and AEP 4200 .

class: PHYS 4400
class title: Informal Advanced Laboratory
description: Experiments of widely varying difficulty in one or more areas, as listed under PHYS 4410, may be done to fill the student's special requirements.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two years physics.

class: PHYS 4410
class title: Advanced Experimental Physics
description: Over 30 available experiments on various topics including atomic and molecular spectroscopy, optics, condensed matter physics, nuclear physics, electrical and microwave circuits, x-rays, and magnetic resonance. Each student selects and performs two experiments and completes one project. Independent work is stressed, and scientific writing and presentation skills are emphasized. Weekly lectures will cover techniques and skills necessary for the class and experimental physics in general.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 3327, PHYS 3318.

class: PHYS 4445
class title: Introduction to General Relativity
description: One-semester introduction to general relativity that develops the essential structure and phenomenology of the theory without requiring prior exposure to tensor analysis. General relativity is a fundamental cornerstone of physics that underlies several of the most exciting areas of current research, including relativistic astrophysics, cosmology, and the search for a quantum theory of gravity. The course briefly reviews special relativity, introduces basic aspects of differential geometry, including metrics, geodesics, and the Riemann tensor, describes black hole spacetimes and cosmological solutions, and concludes with the Einstein equation and its linearized gravitational wave solutions. At the level of Gravity: An Introduction to Einstein's General Relativity by Hartle.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SMR-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: classical mechanics at the level of PHYS 3318 and special relativity at the level of PHYS 1116 or PHYS 2216. Electromagnetism at the level of PHYS 3327 is useful.

class: PHYS 4454
class title: Introductory Solid State Physics
description: Introduction to the physics of crystalline solids. Covers crystal structures; diffraction; electronic states and density functional theory; lattice vibrations; and metals, insulators, and semiconductors. Covers optical properties, magnetism, and superconductivity as time allows. The majority of the course addresses the foundations of the subject, but time is devoted to modern and/or technologically important topics such as quantum size effects. At the level of Introduction to Solid State Physics by Kittel or Solid State Physics by Ashcroft and Mermin.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Highly recommended prerequisite: PHYS 4443, AEP 3620, or CHEM 7930.

class: PHYS 4480
class title: Computational Physics
description: Covers numerical methods for ordinary and partial differential equations, linear algebra and eigenvalue problems, integration, nonlinear equations, optimization, and fast Fourier transforms. Find out how and why the "black-box" numerical routines you use work, how to improve and generalize them, and how to fix them when they don't. Based on the text Numerical Recipes by William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SDS-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PHYS 4481
class title: Quantum Information Processing
description: Hardware that exploits quantum phenomena can dramatically alter the nature of computation. Though constructing a general purpose quantum computer remains a formidable technological challenge, there has been much recent experimental progress. In addition, the theory of quantum computation is of interest in itself, offering new perspectives on the nature of computation and information, as well as providing novel insights into the conceptual puzzles posed by quantum theory. This course is intended for physicists, unfamiliar with computational complexity theory or cryptography, and for computer scientists and mathematicians with prior exposure to quantum mechanics. Topics include: simple quantum algorithms, error correction, cryptography, teleportation, and uses of quantum computing devices either currently available or to be available in the near future.
distribution categories: (PHS-AS, SMR-AS) (CHPH-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a prior course in quantum mechanics (such as PHYS 3316 or AEP 3610).

class: PHYS 4484
class title: Teaching and Learning Physics
description: This 1.5-hour weekly seminar provides undergraduate and graduate students with an introduction to core concepts in teaching and learning physics. Participants read and discuss articles and videos, reflect on their own teaching and learning experiences, and engage in collaborative activities that help them become more effective teachers, learners, and communicators. This seminar is especially valuable for those considering teaching physics at some point in their careers, or who want to improve their own physics learning skills. Topics may include: question types and questioning strategies; classroom discourse; neurological basis of learning; expertise acquisition and expert performance; deliberate practice; misconceptions, mental models and conceptual change; mindsets and psychological interventions; classroom diversity and microaggressions; multiple intelligences and multiple representations; metacognition; active learning; the nature of science; the qualities of effective teachers; and evaluating teaching and learning.

class: PHYS 4485
class title: Teaching Experience I
description: Designed to provide qualified undergraduate students who possess an interest in teaching with a structured experience teaching physics.  Participants collaborate with instructors and graduate teaching assistants to facilitate cooperative learning sessions, laboratory investigations, or homework help sessions.  Total weekly time commitment is 3-4 hours, including instructional contact time (2 hours), preparation time, and instructional staff meeting time.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent, and concurrent or previous enrollment in PHYS 4484.

class: PHYS 4486
class title: Teaching Experience II
description: Teaching experience for qualified undergraduate students in PHYS 1101/PHYS 1102. Contact time will be in the course's Learning Center, in a team environment with graduate student TAs and faculty. Activities include tutoring individual students, working with small groups, assisting students with lab experiments, and participating in course development initiatives.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: minimum grade of A in PHYS 1101/PHYS 1102/PHYS 2207/PHYS 2208, or A- in PHYS 1112/PHYS 2213, or B+ in PHYS 1116/PHYS 2217, or comparable AP or transfer credit.

class: PHYS 4487
class title: Teaching Experience III
description: Continuation of PHYS 4486. Teaching experience for qualified undergraduate students to help with PHYS 1101/PHYS 1102. Contact time will be in the course's Learning Center, in a team environment with graduate student TAs and faculty. Activities include tutoring individual students, working with small groups, assisting students with lab experiments, and participating in course development initiatives.

class: PHYS 4490
class title: Independent Study in Physics
description: Individual project work (reading or laboratory) in any branch of physics.  Products vary, but may include a thesis. Evaluation criteria are decided between student and faculty member.

class: PHYS 4498
class title: Senior Thesis
description: The first half of a two-semester thesis course involving physics-related research under the direct supervision of a faculty member. The thesis research may take many forms including but not restricted to : theoretical calculations, design of instrumentation, experimental research, or numerical simulations. Students wishing to pursue the senior thesis must submit a proposal, with the approval of a faculty supervisor, in spring of their junior year.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion of the core requirements for the physics major.

class: PHYS 4997
class title: Cross-Cultural Work Experience in Physics
description: This independent study course offers physics majors (i.e., undergraduates whose applications to affiliate with the physics major have been approved) an opportunity to reflect on concepts from physics as they were encountered and applied in a recent internship. Students write a short paper describing their work experience and how it connects to the educational objectives of the physics major.

class: PHYS 5520
class title: Supramolecular Biophysics
description: This course will describe how biomolecules cooperate to assembly structures, build material, and process information. We will start by discussing stoichiometric assembly macromolecular complexes. Then, we'll discuss how biomolecules assemble to make 1D, 2D and 3D materials. These include, cytoskeletal filaments, phospholipid bilayers, and biomolecular condensates. Finally, we'll discuss how cells use these phenomena for control (regulation) and computation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistical physics and/or thermodynamics; electrostatics; vector calculus; differential equations; basic scientific computing; introductory biology.

class: PHYS 6500
class title: Informal Graduate Laboratory
description: Experiments of widely varying difficulty in one or more areas, as listed under PHYS 6510, may be done to fill special requirements.

class: PHYS 6510
class title: Advanced Experimental Physics
description: Over 30 available experiments on various topics including atomic and molecular spectroscopy, optics, condensed matter physics, nuclear physics, electrical and microwave circuits, x-rays, and magnetic resonance. Each student selects and performs two experiments and completes one project. Independent work is stressed, and scientific writing and presentation skills are emphasized. Weekly lectures will cover techniques and skills necessary for the class and experimental physics in general.

class: PHYS 6520
class title: Projects in Experimental Physics
description: Projects of modern topical interest that involve some independent development work by student. Opportunity for more initiative in experimental work than is possible in PHYS 6510.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PHYS 6510.

class: PHYS 6553
class title: General Relativity I
description: A comprehensive introduction to Einstein's theory of relativistic gravity. This course focuses on the formal structure of the theory.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of special relativity and methods of dynamics at level of Classical Mechanics by Goldstein.

class: PHYS 6561
class title: Electrodynamics
description: Covers special relativity, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic potentials, conservation laws, Green's functions, electromagnetic waves, dispersion, radiation theory, and scattering. The practical application of appropriate mathematical methods is emphasized. The course will use Classical Electrodynamics by Jackson and Modern Electrodynamics by Zangwill.

class: PHYS 6572
class title: Quantum Mechanics I
description: First part of the two-semester graduate quantum mechanics sequence. Covers non-relativistic quantum physics, focusing on fundamental conceptual issues and methods. Topics include: fundamental concepts of quantum mechanics using the Dirac notation, theory of angular momentum and spin, symmetries,  approximation methods and identical particles, at the level of Sakurai Modern Quantum Mechanics.

class: PHYS 6599
class title: Cosmology
description: Intended to provide a detailed theoretical development of current ideas in cosmology. Topics include Big Bang cosmology and the universe's matter content; a cosmological chronology of the very early universe, symmetry breaking, inflationary scenarios, nucleosynthesis, recombination, growth of irregularities, galaxy formation and clustering, dark energy; current and future cosmological observational approaches.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistical physics, quantum mechanics, and electromagnetic theory courses.

class: PHYS 7601
class title: Foundations of Fluid Mechanics I
description: Foundations of fluid mechanics from an advanced viewpoint, including formulation of continuum fluid dynamics; kinematic descriptions of fluid flow, derivation of the Navier-Stokes equations and energy equation for compressible fluids; and sound waves, viscous flows, boundary layers, and potential flows.
outcome: Students will be able to identify important fluid properties and physical processes in fluid flows., Students will be able to formulate mathematical models for fluid flows., Students will be able to select methods of analysis and computation., Students will be able to develop solutions and interpret them in physical terms., Students will be able to explain what was learned in written and oral form., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of fluid mechanics (equivalent to MAE 3230 or higher), in addition to basic knowledge in vector calculus, ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, and complex variable analysis.

class: PHYS 7635
class title: Solid-State Physics I
description: Survey of the physics of solids starting with crystal structures and the band theory of electrons and phonons. Selected topics from semiconductors, magnetism, superconductivity, spin liquids, disordered materials, topology, and mesoscopic physics. The focus is to enable graduate research at the current frontiers of condensed matter physics.
outcome: Upon completion of the course, skills the students will acquire include (but are not limited to) calculating band structures using tight binding models, calculating the positions and relative intensities of Bragg peaks for X-rays scattering experiments, performing simple calculations of transport coefficients such as conductivity,  calculating phonon dispersion curves for different crystal structures, and calculating Berry phases in topological systems., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate statistical mechanics, and familiarity with graduate-level quantum mechanics. Recommended prerequisite: comprehensive undergraduate solid-state physics course (e.g., PHYS 4454).

class: PHYS 7651
class title: Relativistic Quantum Field Theory I
description: Introduction to relativistic quantum field theory for applications in particle physics. Topics include quantization of scalar fields,  perturbation theory, Feynman diagrams, conservation laws, calculation of decay rates and cross sections, causality and unitarity, introduction to radiative corrections, renormalization and effective field theories, introduction to the Lorentz and Poincare groups, Weyl, Majorana and Dirac fermions, quantization and Feynman rules for fermionic theories. At the level of Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model by Schwartz.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 6572, and PHYS 6561 (one of these courses may be taken concurrently).

class: PHYS 7653
class title: Statistical Physics II
description: An advanced, graduate-level exploration of selected topics in statistical mechanics – topics such as mean-field theory, scaling analysis, theories of quantum and classical phase transitions, renormalization-group methods, classical spin models, quantum rotor models, etc.

class: PHYS 7667
class title: Physics of Stars, Neutron Stars and Black Holes
description: Major topics include: the structure and evolution of stars; solar neutrino astronomy; stellar seismology; the physics of white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes; the physics of low mass stars and connection to planets. Basic ideas in atomic and molecular physics, condensed matter physics, nuclear and particle physics, fluid mechanics and general relativity are introduced in a practical fashion that emphasizes concepts useful for understanding astrophysical phenomena.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: physics at the advanced undergraduate-level. Though helpful, no astronomy background required.

class: PHYS 7680
class title: Computational Physics
description: Covers numerical methods for ordinary and partial differential equations, linear algebra and eigenvalue problems, integration, nonlinear equations, optimization, and fast Fourier transforms. Find out how and why the "black-box" numerical routines you use work, how to improve and generalize them, and how to fix them when they don't. Based on the text Numerical Recipes by William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery.

class: PHYS 7681
class title: Quantum Information Processing
description: Hardware that exploits quantum phenomena can dramatically alter the nature of computation. Though constructing a general purpose quantum computer remains a formidable technological challenge, there has been much recent experimental progress. In addition, the theory of quantum computation is of interest in itself, offering new perspectives on the nature of computation and information, as well as providing novel insights into the conceptual puzzles posed by quantum theory. This course is intended for physicists, unfamiliar with computational complexity theory or cryptography, and for computer scientists and mathematicians with prior exposure to quantum mechanics. Topics include: simple quantum algorithms, error correction, cryptography, teleportation, and uses of quantum computing devices either currently available or to be available in the near future.

class: PHYS 7684
class title: Teaching and Learning Physics
description: This 1.5-hour weekly seminar provides undergraduate and graduate students with an introduction to core concepts in physics education. Participants discuss articles and videos drawn from physics and science education research and from cognitive science, and engage in collaborative activities that help them become more effective teachers, communicators and learners. This seminar is especially valuable for those considering teaching physics at some point in their careers. Topics include: Questioning Strategies, Classroom Discourse, Teaching through misconceptions, Argumentation approach to instruction, Learning Theory, Conceptions and Conceptual Change and Fixed vs Growth Mind-set, Science communication. Text: Articles from science, engineering, and math education journals.

class: PHYS 7685
class title: 1st Year Physics Grad Seminar
description: This seminar is indented for first-year graduate students in the Department of Physics. Topics covered include general resources and policies,  fellowship applications, library services, resources for well-being, diversity and inclusion, and faculty research presentations. This one-credit course provides some of the foundations and tools for graduate research in the field of Physics and surveys some of the available research opportunities and groups.

class: PHYS 7687
class title: Special Topics in Physics
description: Graduate Topics course; topics change every year.

class: PHYS 7690
class title: Independent Study in Physics
description: Special graduate study in some branch of physics, either theoretical or experimental, under the direction of any professorial member of the staff.

class: PLSCI 1101
class title: Plant Science and Systems
description: This course will explore the scientific principles and processes forming the foundation of plant-based systems that provide food, fiber, beverage, environmental enhancement, medicine and art. Students will learn the language of plants and growing systems including the complex interactions among climate, soil, and human manipulation to meet our needs and desires. This course will challenge the notions of sustainable, organic, GMOs and how plants solve environmental problems. We consider the science behind plant growth, health, performance and their interactions with the environment. Successful completion of this course will prepare students for more advanced courses in the Plant Sciences curriculum.
outcome: Explain, evaluate, and effectively interpret factual claims, theories and assumptions in the application of the plant sciences., Integrate quantitative and qualitative information to reach defensible conclusions on applied plant science topics., Communicate effectively through writing and speech about issues in the applied plant sciences., Demonstrate the capability to work both independently and in cooperation with others., 

class: PLSCI 1110
class title: Pathways to Success in Agriculture and Plant Sciences
description: Navigating the first year of college is a personal and professional challenge. This course provides opportunities for new students who major in Agricultural Sciences or Plant Sciences to acclimate, discover, and begin to thrive. You'll engage in self-discovery, make new connections, learn about fields of study and career options, develop a resume, and start an ePortfolio. Weekly workshops are combined with field visits, guests, and peer engagement.
outcome: Confidently facilitate discussions with faculty, staff, peers, guest speakers, and alumni for support and resources, such as requesting letters of recommendation, seeking positions in labs, and identifying internships., Describe the vast career opportunities across the agricultural and plant sciences disciplines, including the work being done by various faculty on campus., Articulate individual goals and action steps for academic, extracurricular, and career planning., Define academic and professional skills for successful degree completion and job acquisition or graduate school admission., Plan a course schedule that includes major and college requirements, plus potential electives., Reflect on how course planning and career paths influence one another., 

class: PLSCI 1300
class title: Just Food: Exploring the Modern Food System
description: This course provides a comprehensive review of the modern food system from the green revolution to the industrialized model of today. It offers a critical perspective on existing paradigms and insights into alternative approaches for producing food security, environmental stewardship, and equity in an era of climate change. The course is taught by an interdisciplinary team of instructors who bring insights from both the biophysical and social sciences and will ask students to consider their food using a systems-thinking lens. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Describe key concepts across disciplines and perspectives related to the food system, including relationships between food, human society (including politics and culture), and the non-human environment., Describe some key historical and contemporary events, processes, and concepts that have shaped the current food system., Apply systems thinking to describe current key debates, concepts, trade-offs, and challenges in the food system from multiple perspectives., Communicate factual aspects of the impact of climate change on global food system., Evaluate assumptions and values about food systems that underpin one's own thinking and that of others, connect personal values and beliefs to diet and nutritional choices., Apply and synthesize scientific evidence in support of arguments that address food systems research questions., Analyze and critically evaluate food systems research results and policies for evidence-based assessments and ethical decision-making., Engage in respectful dialogue, collaborative teamwork, and problem-solving with those of differing viewpoints and backgrounds., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PLSCI 1560
class title: Application of CHEM 1560 to Plant Sciences
description: The purpose of this course is to facilitate making connections between biology and chemistry at the time you are learning the chemistry. In reality, chemistry is essential to biology. Life is, after all, a specialized set of chemical reactions, highly diverse and complex to be sure, but chemical reactions nonetheless. Developing an understanding and appreciation of this critical connection between chemistry and plant science is the primary goal of this course. At the same time, we should all recognize that chemistry is a challenging subject for most students. Because the application of chemistry to concepts and problems in biology first requires one to understand the chemistry, the course will also place a significant emphasis on making sure students understand the basic chemistry as well. 
outcome: Describe the biological context of the chemical phenomena in plant science., Give specific examples of plant process(es) to which the chemical concepts are applicable., Think critically about the material covered in CHEM 1560., Articulate the intimate connections between chemistry and plant science., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: CHEM 1560.

class: PLSCI 1900
class title: Sustainable Agriculture: Food, Farming, and the Future
description: Introduction to agronomy and agroecology and an exploration of environmental, economic, and social factors that influence agriculture. Students participate in interactive discussions about food systems and food security. Labs include field trips to a variety of field crop, vegetable, and dairy farms and experiential activities designed to enhance understanding of important themes in sustainable agriculture, including multifunctionality and resilience.
outcome: Understand 'real world' sustainable agriculture by interacting with local farmers., Explain what sustainable agriculture means and why it is important., Describe the dominant types of agriculture operations in the region., Compare different methods of crop and livestock production in terms of environmental, economic, and social factors., Think holistically about production and food systems., Critically evaluate information about agriculture from diverse sources (e.g., newspapers, Google, scientific journal articles)., Create presentations and short films using videography equipment and software., Identify components of a well-supported, articulate argument., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2100
class title: Medical Ethnobotany
description: Plants have always played a key role in the history of life on Earth and have served as medicinal agents in all societies since prehistoric times. Medical Ethnobotany is the study of medicinal plants used by a group of people. Medicinal plants are either critical constituents of many modem drugs or provide templates for synthetic analogous molecules. In this course we will introduce and be acquainted with past and current plant-based natural remedies used across the globe, exploring their efficacy and mode of actions. We will analyze and compare how plants are employed in the different continents to heal (or alleviate) a plethora of pathological conditions, and explore how they affect our bodies (which organic system is affected, i.e., gastro-intestinal, central nervous or respiratory system). The course is designed for students with an interest in the natural world and in traditional medicine. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Describe the role of plants in human health and in social contexts in the past and the present., Identify and define the most commonly used medicinal plants across the continents and their bioactive compounds., Discuss the processes involved in the isolation of active bio compounds from plants., Compare how medicinal plants are used in various cultures, which organ(s) they affect in the human body, how efficacy is measured, and explain in general terms their modes of action., Integrate concepts from ethnobotany, biochemistry, pharmacology, toxicology and conservation., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2110
class title: Field Crop Systems
description: Principles of field-crop production of major crops used for food, feed, fiber and bioenergy. Includes introductory concepts of plant growth, development and maturation as they relate to crop performance and management, adaptation to soil, climatic and environmental conditions, tillage, mineral nutrition, pests, cropping sequences, management systems, and crop improvement. Grain, oilseed, biofuel and forage crops are emphasized. Laboratory includes field trips and demonstrations of the most important crop species, morphological and growth characteristics essential to environmental adaptation and response to management.
outcome: Recognize and identify the production constraints, nutritional characteristics, and storage conditions of the world's major food, feed and forage crops., Identify the vegetative and flower morphologies of major cereal, legume, and forage crops., Describe the stages of root, shoot, and seed development in corn, soybean, and other crops., Apply the principles of crop science to explain the geographic distribution and response of crop species to differences in light, temperature, water status, and soil properties., Describe and demonstrate the impact of agroecosystems, cropping systems, and management factors such as plant establishment, crop variety, soil mineral nutrition, pests, and diseases on the productivity and quality of crops., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2200
class title: Introduction to Mapping and Spatial Analysis with GIS
description: This class serves as an introduction to the principles of geographic information systems (GIS) and mapping to understand natural, social, and environmental issues at a range of scales. Students will develop competence and confidence at recognizing, interpreting, and applying spatially-informed thinking approaches via maps and mapping. Emphasis will be on accessing, processing, visualizing, and analyzing geospatial data for communication and decision making, including understanding the role of uncertainty in the use of digital spatial data and maps. Throughout the class, students will gain experience in structuring spatial problems, organizing and managing geospatial data, modeling and spatial analysis, and digital cartography. Students will use both desktop and online mapping software and applications.
outcome: Describe how location-based information and spatial attributes affect environmental problems and issues at different geographic scales., Explain the structure and function of geographic information systems., Develop basic proficiency with coordinate systems, map projections, and data as necessary for data coordination and management., Differentiate among spatial data models appropriate for diverse applications and scales., Demonstrate basic proficiency to seek, identify, access, and prepare geospatial data sets from a range of online public sources., Model best practices of data organization and management skills., Select and apply methods of analyzing vector and raster data sets., Identify errors from and invalid approaches to conducting GIS-based analyses., Design and produce final map products informed by standard cartographic principles., Develop and present a collaborative group project., 

class: PLSCI 2260
class title: Practicum in Forest Farming as an Agroforestry System
description: This course is a hands-on, experiential learning opportunity for students who wish to acquire the skills involved in planning and implementing the agroforestry practice known as forest farming. This course will involve working with and learning about various non-timber forest crops, forest site assessment and design and implementation of a group project. Weekly activities will be integrated with reading assignments through the process of journaling. Most of the weekly activities for this course will take place at the MacDaniels Nut Grove, an on-campus outdoor learning facility, where re students will engage in hands-on learning activities related to non-timber forest crops, site assessment, design and management. Students will be directly involved in the evolving development and management of this existing forest farming teaching and public education site.
outcome: Work with cultivated plants in a natural forest environment., Compare the biological and ethical consequences of a non-traditional agroforestry/forest farming to traditional agricultural systems (horticulture, agronomy)., Explain the concept of productive conservation as it applies to forest farming., Integrate sustainable forest farming practices in natural forest ecosystems with minimal negative ecological consequences., 

class: PLSCI 2400
class title: Green World, Blue Planet
description: Focuses on helping individuals understand how scientific information relates to the issues they face as citizens, in management decision making, and in public policy. To what extent should genetic engineering of crop plants be permitted? Should we place limits on fossil fuel consumption as a means of limiting global warming and global climate change? Must human endeavors be restricted in certain areas to maintain diversity? The format of this course is interactive, with lectures and discussions about how we as a society deal with controversial issues. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Explain, evaluate, and effectively interpret basic concepts in cell and molecular biology., Explain, evaluate, and effectively interpret basic concepts in general ecology and biodiversity., Integrate qualitative information to reach defensible and creative conclusions about the impacts of climate change, genetic engineering, and biodiversity on the natural world and society., Communicate effectively through writing, speech, and visual information via written exams, writing assignments and class discussion concerning the above topics., Articulate the views of people with diverse perspectives on the above issues., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2410
class title: Introductory Plant Diversity and Evolution
description: Introduction to plant diversity, ecology, structure, and evolutionary adaptation, with an emphasis on land plants. Laboratory and lectures are integrated to provide hands-on skills and concepts. First and second weeks of laboratory are field trips, starting with the first full week of classes. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Identify cells, tissues, and organ systems that comprise multicellular plants, and discuss how these emergent systems support plant functions., Distinguish among the major land plant lineages., Identify the three major plant life cycles and to conceptually connect how these life cycles are related to one another., Communicate the basic principles of Darwinian evolution by means of natural selection and the major principles of plant biology., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2480
class title: Vascular Plant Systematics
description: An introduction to the goals and methods of plant systematics, and a survey of the diversity of vascular plants, including ferns, conifers, flowering plants, and related groups. Lectures cover plant reproduction and evolution, patterns of plant diversity, biogeography, and the methods used to analyze and interpret these patterns. The laboratory presents a survey of the diversity of vascular plants with a focus on major plant families, emphasizing groups that are prominent in natural habitats and in cultivation.
outcome: Describe the goals of systematics and the methods used to analyze and interpret the history of plant diversification., Interpret and describe the vegetative and reproductive structures of plants using standard botanical terminology., Discuss the methods used to interpret major evolutionary changes in plant characteristics, with reference to the time, geographic location, and ecological setting in which these changes occurred., Discuss the nature of plant species, the principal mechanisms of plant speciation, and the methods used to describe, name, and classify species and higher-level groups., Describe the role of plant biodiversity and the study of systematics in conservation and sustainability initiatives., Work collaboratively to discuss the patterns and processes leading to our current biodiversity on earth., Distinguish 60 families of vascular plants., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOEE 1780 or PLSCI 2410.

class: PLSCI 2600
class title: Soil Science
description: Designed for undergraduate and graduate students interested in a comprehensive introduction to Soil Science from both an environmental and management perspective as well as graduate students who wish to advanced their understanding of the biogeochemical (biologic, hydrologic and mineral interfaces and linkages underpinning and controlling the soil, plant and atmospheric continuum. This course examines the dynamic relationship of soils with the environment and will place particular focus on both the larger landscape as well as site specific implications of this relationship. The course is flipped with online lectures, in-class homework, projects and activities as well as a weekly laboratory and is presented in three components.
outcome: Describe and explain the distribution and variability of soils and their properties across the landscape., Display a knowledge of how these properties are created and how they affect landscape processes (both at a large and small scale)., Demonstrate a preliminary ability to investigate soil characteristics., Exhibit an understanding of how we manage (or not) soils and their properties for multiple objectives., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 2940
class title: Introduction to Agricultural Machinery
description: Overview of agricultural machinery used in the production of field crops. Information is presented in a lecture and field laboratory format stressing "hands-on" equipment demonstrations and use, particularly of tractors. Tractor safety is emphasized during the initial three weeks of tractor instruction where the students practice learning to competently drive a tractor. Successful completion provides a broad understanding of agricultural machinery operation and design rationale.
outcome: Explain the design rationale and general operation of standard agricultural machinery., Decide which types of equipment should be used for various farm tasks and applications., Articulate the current and developing trends in agricultural machinery technology., 

class: PLSCI 2990
class title: Introduction to Research Methods in Plant Science
description: Intended for students who are new to undergraduate research. Students enrolled in PLSCI 2990 may be reading scientific literature, learning research techniques, or assisting with ongoing research. The faculty supervisor determines the work goals and the form of the final report.
outcome: Conduct research in plant science, including framing and formulation of scientific questions, developing testable hypotheses, design and execution of original experiments, and interpretation and explanation of scientific data in relation to the scientific literature., 

class: PLSCI 3000
class title: Annual and Perennial Plants in the Landscape
description: This course is an introduction to the identification, cultural requirements, and use of northern climate annual and perennial herbaceous plants in the landscape. Herbaceous plants are important parts of the landscape. They provide pollination resources and aid in habitat for fauna. In addition, they can add biodiversity and reduce stormwater runoff when used appropriately.
outcome: Recognize by sight the genus, species, and common name of approximately 100-plus herbaceous garden plants., Describe the site conditions under which to grow each of these plants., Comprehend aspects of design, establishment and management of annuals and perennials in the landscape., 

class: PLSCI 3010
class title: Biology and Management of Plant Diseases
description: Introduction to the biology of the pathogens that cause plant diseases, and the diagnosis and management of plant diseases. Topics include the biology of bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, viruses, and nematodes; disease cycles; plant disease epidemiology; and the principles and practices of plant disease management. Intended for students who want a practical knowledge of plant diseases and their control, as well as for students preparing for advanced courses in plant pathology and plant-microbe biology.
outcome: Examine the concept of disease in the context of natural and agriculturally relevant plant systems., Demonstrate a good working knowledge of the biology of key plant pathogen groups: viruses, bacteria, nematodes, fungi, stramenopiles, and plants., Recognize the basics of plant disease diagnostics and integrated approaches to plant disease management., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of biology.

class: PLSCI 3025
class title: Hydroponic Food Crop Production and Management
description: Covers principles and practices of commercial hydroponic vegetable and herb production in controlled environment agriculture (CEA). Topics include: growing environments (high tunnels, greenhouses, and warehouse/vertical farms), manipulation of and crop response to the aerial and root-zone environments including estimating energy use in diverse growing environments, nutrient solution preparation and management, aquaponics and organic hydroponics, crop maintenance, production scheduling, integrated pest management, business plan development, and markets. Laboratory session will reinforce lectures through hands-on practice of concepts. Students will be responsible for growing several crops including leafy greens, herbs, and vine crops (such as tomatoes and cucumbers).
outcome: Explain how hydroponic systems are designed to meet the physical, chemical, and biological needs of plant roots. Discuss the benefits and constraints of several different hydroponic systems., Articulate the ideal growing environment and plant response to temperature, light, and carbon dioxide for several of the most common hydroponic crops., Estimate the energy costs and crop yields in different growing environments., Demonstrate plant care and maintenance practices necessary to produce healthy hydroponic crops., Use a spreadsheet to develop fertilizer recipes for common hydroponic crops., Use a spreadsheet to estimate production costs and revenue of a hydroponic crop., Articulate how hydroponics relates to sustainable, organic, and local food production., 

class: PLSCI 3030
class title: FoodCycle: Systems Thinking Toward Circular Economy for Organic Resources
description: In seeking to understand issues and opportunities at the nexus of agriculture, sanitation, water, health and the natural and built environments, students will gain skills in systems thinking, participatory design and innovation towards systems change. Through individual and collective work, students will conduct general and specific systems analysis and construct systems models to identify opportunities to reduce carbon pollution, improve system health. Students will seek to learn from cases and literature from diverse national and international contexts. The Cornell campus will be considered a "living laboratory" for an inquiry into how organic resources flow through our facilities, and how waste flows might be utilized to produce energy, fertilizer, food, building materials and/or other valued products. Students will engage with local entities (facilities, organizations, farms and other enterprises) to gain specific information that will inform our analysis. Students will engage in hands-on work to learn about ways in which organic resources can be up-cycled.
outcome: Describe concepts and skills related to systems thinking, analysis and intervention, including ability to understand and design pathways to change in diverse contexts., Explain systems related to organic resource management, such as those involved in food, agriculture, sanitation, the built environment, and health-related surveillance., Analyze and conceptualize context-related similarities and differences that influence problems, opportunities and pathways to change., Design a waste-to-value chain (e.g., porta-potties/toilets ; loo-litter from corn cobs [similar in purpose and format to kitty litter]; making building materials from agricultural wastes)., Create up-cycling activities, including design, invention, production and utilization., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: PLSCI 3050
class title: Arboriculture: Applied Tree Care
description: Gain hands-on experience with tree establishment, nutrition, plant health care, diagnosing tree disorders, pruning techniques, tree worker safety and urban forestry.
outcome: Demonstrate knowledge of plant morphology, anatomy, physiology, and growth and how those play roles in tree selection and care., Inspect trees for condition, make risk assessment, and recommend actions., Describe the nutritional requirements of plants, soil water relationships in plants, and soil management., Describe the techniques and materials used in proper tree climbing and management, including pruning, and support systems., Gain knowledge to pass the ISA-certified arborist examination., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: LA 4910.

class: PLSCI 3100
class title: Medicinal Botany and Drug Discovery
description: Plants have been a source of medicinal agents for thousands of years and a remarkable number of modern drugs have been isolated or derived from plants. In this course, we will explore the mechanisms of action and effects of injurious plants (e.g., poisons, causing allergic reactions), of medicinal plants found to have remedial properties, and discuss which body system(s) they affect (e.g., digestive, urinary), and psychoactive plants affecting the central nervous system (e.g., hallucinogens, stimulants). We will get familiar with the chemistry, pharmacology and efficacy demonstrated in clinical trials of the most used plant-derived drugs, and the mechanisms of the diseases targeted with these treatments. Furthermore, we will discuss the biosynthesis and distribution of plant secondary metabolites, the use of techniques in the isolation and structure elucidation of natural products, and of biological assays used in the discovery of chemicals with pharmacological activity, and the steps involved in drug production and approval.
outcome: Describe the biosynthesis and distribution of plant secondary metabolites, the use of techniques in isolation and structure elucidation of natural products, and biological assays in the discovery of chemicals with pharmacological activity., Explain the chemistry, pharmacology, mode of action and efficacy demonstrated in clinical trials of the most used plant-derived drugs  in the North American market, which organ(s) they affect in the human body, and the mechanisms of the diseases targeted with these treatments., Compare selected medicinal plants, their historical value, how their active components are extracted or/and manipulated to give specific drugs and the process involved in drug production and approval., Critically evaluate and present information from peer-reviewed scientific articles., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a minimum of one semester of introductory biology (either BIOG 1140, BIOG 1440, or BIOMG 1350) or one semester of organic chemistry (either CHEM 1570, CHEM 3530, or CHEM 3570); or permission of instructor.

class: PLSCI 3150
class title: Weed Biology and Management
description: This course examines components of the biology, ecology, and management of weeds in crop and non-crop ecosystems, particularly in the Northeastern United States. The first part of the course focuses on biological/ecological factors that govern seed dormancy, plant growth, population dynamics, competitiveness, reproduction, and survival. Close attention is given to accurate identification of plants and to characteristics that make weeds competitive, undesirable, or both. The second part of the course examines strategies to control weeds, including their benefits and drawbacks. Aspects of chemical control, including classification, mode of action, selectivity, symptomotology, and resistance, are presented. Herbicide-tolerant crop (i.e., GMO) issues and health and environmental concerns of herbicide use are addressed. The use of integrated approaches to weed management is emphasized. 
outcome: Identify the different life stages of at least 90 weed species commonly found in the Northeastern United States and southern Canada., Identify and describe the major biological factors and ecological principles that influence weed growth, population dynamics, invasiveness, and survival., Describe the various strategies currently being used to control and/or suppress weeds in different crop and non-crop systems., Identify the classification, mode of action, selectivity, and symptomatology of commonly used herbicides., Calculate and apply the appropriate amount of a given herbicide that is required to treat a specific area using a backpack sprayer., Describe the diversity and impact that weeds have in different ecosystems., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory course in biology or botany.

class: PLSCI 3190
class title: Mushrooms of Field and Forest
description: Students learn to identify mushrooms and other macrofungi we collect on a series of six afternoon field trips to local forests. During evening labs, students practice identification skills, using keys and microscopes to observe and differentiate the diverse mushrooms we've collected. The course takes advantage of the peak Fall mushroom season in our region. Brief in-lab lectures introduce fungal diversity and the roles mushrooms play in Earth's ecosystems. 
outcome: Recognize a fungus when you see one., Distinguish a handful of common mushrooms in the field., Observe and describe in vivid detail the characteristics of any mushroom., Select an appropriate field guide or key, then integrate your observations to identify unknown mushrooms., Develop a collection of macrofungi from the local environment., Discuss the roles of fungi in the ecosystem., Explain to others, convincingly, why fungi are cool., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 3210
class title: Soil and Crop Management for Sustainability
description: Students learn about agronomy and recent advances in sustainable soil and crop management, and gain a lot of practical farming knowledge. Integrated perspectives on the physical, biological, and chemical aspects of soil management in the broader context of agroecosystems are explored. Soil and crop management practices and resulting interactions between soil, water, organisms, and organic and chemical inputs form the basis for discussions on diverse cropping systems, soil health, water quality and quantity, bioenergy, greenhouse gases, and sustainability.
outcome: Articulate the grand challenge of sustaining future world populations., Synthesize and evaluate concepts of sustainable soil and crop management, relate and integrate them into your personal experience through assigned readings, homework, writing, in-class discussion, and group collaborative work., Recognize and describe basic soil physical, biological, and chemical processes through analysis, graphing (in Excel), and interpretation of data for laboratory and homework activities., Summarize factors affecting soil management and crop production, and describe common criteria used to evaluate the sustainability of cropping systems., Use technologies (including Adapt-N) and cite policies related to the management of soil and crops., Apply what you learn from reading, lectures, hands-on experience and the use of commonly used management tools to assess, plan, and modify sustainable soil management practices., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 1900 or PLSCI 2600.

class: PLSCI 3400
class title: Far Beyond Ithaca (FBI): Plant Explorations
description: Sections in this course prepare students for faculty-led winter-session travel courses offered through the School of Integrative Plant Science. Students spend seven class sessions in the fall focusing on a particular challenge in plant sciences, such as climate change and the spread of plant diseases, drought and viticulture, and the tension between biodiversity, species conservation and large-scale agriculture. Students then enroll in the complementary winter-session course and travel to a domestic or international locale where they engage with communities confronting and working to solve these challenges today.
outcome: Describe the state of plant communities and/or agroecosystems in the targeted region., Determine how humans are interfacing with these systems to create challenges or to help mitigate problems., Explain how events in the targeted region can have impacts at home., 

class: PLSCI 3440
class title: Evolutionary Plant Biology
description: This course provides a comprehensive overview of evolution with an emphasis on plants as excellent exemplars for understanding evolutionary theory and the interpretation of data pertaining to evolution. The topics will include population generics, developmental biology (including comparative embryology and anatomy), theories about speciation (including allopatric, sympatric, and peripatric models), the empirical study of speciation (examples include autopolyploidy, and allopolyploidy), macroevolution (including species selection, kin selection, and multilevel selection theory), the evolution of multicellularity, physical constraints on evolution, evolutionary ecology, and major evolutionary transitions as recorded in the fossil record.
outcome: Critically evaluate information pertaining to evolution., Describe the various lines of evidence supporting the theory of evolution, including evidence drawn from molecular and population genetics, comparative studies of embryology, morphology, and anatomy, biogeography, and the fossil record., Demonstrate how changes at the DNA sequence level constitute the core of evolution., Articulate the importance of plants to evolution and understanding of evolutionary theory., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: PLSCI 2250 or BIOMG 2800.

class: PLSCI 3450
class title: Basic Plant Anatomy
description: Descriptive course with equal emphasis on development and mature structure. Lecture, laboratory, and reading are integrated in a study guide. The laboratory offers the opportunity to develop the practical skills required to make anatomical diagnoses and to write anatomical descriptions.
outcome: Describe the variety of anatomical data and concepts to identify the organization of plant histology and morphology., Perform practical diagnosis on anatomical "unknowns.", Use the necessary tools to identify plant anatomical forms, function and evolutionary diversity based on comparative studies of several taxa among vascular plants., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory course in biology or botany.

class: PLSCI 3575
class title: Principles of Vegetable Production
description: Commercial vegetable production from variety selection to postharvest. Topics include crop physiology and culture, soil and pest management, stand establishment, marketing, and history of production. Term project required. Field trips to large-scale conventional, small, diversified, and organic farms are planned early in the semester.
outcome: Describe the scale of the vegetable industry from the local to international markets and the challenges facing producers., Appraise how successful vegetable production is related to soil health, cultural practices, pest management and marketing and develop a farm plan that considers all aspects of production and marketing for one vegetable crop., Demonstrate the ability to diagnose common vegetable problems and offer solutions., Develop the ability to grow a wide variety of vegetables either commercially or as a gardener., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 1101, PLSCI 2600, or equivalent.

class: PLSCI 4020
class title: Plant Propagation
description: Plant propagation, the multiplication of plants, is both a science and an art. This class will introduce the principles, practices and techniques of sexual and asexual propagation of horticultural plants. Emphasis is placed on learning the techniques that are involved with the many aspects of plant propagation as well as the science behind the methods. The art of plant propagation will be learned through hands-on experiences with seed propagation, cutting propagation, grafting &amp; budding systems, layering, specialized plant structures (bulbs, corms, etc.), and tissue culture for micropropagation. In addition, propagation media, greenhouse environmental control and management, and plant care, as they relate to propagation, will be emphasized. The science behind the methods that are learned will be explained in order to develop a better understanding of plant propagation and how to make it successful. This knowledge base and the practical, hands-on experiences will give students the ability to better solve problems that arise during the propagation and growth of plants.
outcome: Demonstrate proficiency in the propagation of plants through seeds, cuttings, grafting, layering, and micropropagation., Recognize how the different environmental conditions, types of plants, and growth stages of plants affect the success of plant propagation., Think critically about plant propagation and the different techniques and applications that are used for its success., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 2410.

class: PLSCI 4030
class title: Genetic Improvement of Crop Plants
description: Genetic enhancement of crop value to humans began with domestication and continues with farmers' variety development and scientifically trained plant breeders' applications of Mendelian, quantitative, and molecular genetics. This course examines crop genetic improvement methods by discussing the history and current practice of plant breeding, tools available to breeders, decision-making about breeding objectives and methods, and the roles of plant breeding in addressing global challenges including climate change, sustainability, equity, food security, and malnutrition.
outcome: Value the contribution of Indigenous groups in domestication of modern crops and their cultural significance., Explain the genetics that control plant characteristics and how genes can be manipulated to improve plant traits., Describe the reproductive mechanisms in crop and horticultural plants., Explain the range of phenotypic traits that are important targets for genetic improvement of plants, and the social and environmental contexts of their trait values, Describe the range of phenotypic and genomic selection techniques and approaches used by plant breeders., Explain the different approaches used to breed self- and cross-pollinated crops and the development of hybrids., Describe recurrent selection techniques., Describe the roles of tissue culture and genetic transformation in plant improvement., Explore the contributions of plant breeding to agriculture and food systems., Summarize concisely in writing the objectives, main results, and conclusions described in primary research papers in plant breeding and genetics., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800 or PLSCI 2250 or other standard genetics course, plus a course in crops or horticulture.

class: PLSCI 4070
class title: Nutritional Quality Improvement of Food Crops
description: The nutrients in human diets are ultimately derived from plants. However, the edible portions of the world's most extensively grown staple food crops are poor sources for numerous micronutrients and health-promoting compounds that are essential for sustaining and enhancing life. The improvement of crop nutritional quality through breeding, termed biofortification, is a sustainable strategy being used to address micronutrient deficiences worldwide. This course covers recent progress on crop nutritional quality trait improvement. The lectures will focus on vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, phytonutrients, essential amino acids, and fatty acids in the context of better human nutrition and health.
outcome: Articulate why there is a compelling need for improving the nutritional quality of food crops., Explain the approaches and mechanisms used for nutritional quality improvement., Describe the status of development and commercialization of nutrient-dense crops., Demonstrate improvement in the ability to write and speak to scientific audiences., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one majors-level biology course or permission of instructors.

class: PLSCI 4080
class title: Methods of Plant Breeding Laboratory
description: Field trips to plant breeding programs involve discussion of breeding methods used, overall goals, selection and screening techniques, and variety and germplasm release. Additional labs include selection techniques for various traits, intellectual property issues, genetically modified crops, and international agriculture. For a term project, each student designs a comprehensive breeding program on a chosen crop.
outcome: Design a breeding program to improve both quantitative and qualitative traits in plants., Describe the impact that plant breeding has on community and global health and well-being., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: PLSCI 4030 or equivalent.

class: PLSCI 4230
class title: Equitable Crop Improvement: From Theory to Practice
description: This course explores how global crop improvement processes and outcomes can address social inequalities from design to implementation and impact. It covers a broad range of topics, offering perspective on how systematic social inequalities shape whose priorities are served by crop improvement programs locally, and globally. Drawing from theory and methodology across diverse disciplines, this course encourages students to critically analyze mainstream crop improvement paradigms with an equity lens, and design more inclusive alternatives.
outcome: Describe key issues and concepts related to equity and social inclusion in global crop improvement., Identify systematic oppression at multiple levels, and how these limit the representation and voice of historically marginalized groups in crop improvement theory and practice., Describe how interdisciplinary (bridging social and biophysical sciences) crop improvement research is conceptualized and practiced., Explain how social science theories, methods and data enable equitable crop improvement processes and outcomes., Describe how equitable crop improvement principles and strategies are applied across a product development pipeline, from varietal design to selection and release through critical analysis and case studies., Demonstrate knowledge and awareness of the cultural practices, values and beliefs of diverse groups of individuals., Assess one's own cultural perspective and the potential for associated biases, and how these may shape scientific practice in crop improvement research., Respectfully communicate and collaborate across difference with individuals from different identities, disciplines and backgrounds., 
distribution categories: (D-AG)

class: PLSCI 4290
class title: Remote Sensing and Modeling for Ecosystems
description: This course introduces advanced concepts of remote sensing and numerical modeling, with hands-on experience in data acquisition, processing, and interpretation. This course aims to explore key questions facing the agronomic and natural eco-systems using remote sensing techniques and ecological modeling at various scales. It provides hands-on experience in remote sensing techniques and using datasets/tools and model simulations to address research questions.
outcome: Describe the basic principles in remote sensing., Describe the spectral signatures of land surface properties and appropriate application., Acquire satellite dataset from NASA, ESA, and Google Earth Engine., Process remote sensing data using ENVI, and R (or Python)., Run mechanistic model simulations in the CLM framework., Apply remote sensing observations and model simulations to interpret agro-ecological phenomena., Conduct an independent applications-based project., Develop and present an oral and collaborative group project., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of the basics of remote sensing, calculus, physics, and programming skills, and some background in agro-ecosystems.

class: PLSCI 4300
class title: Mycology
description: Fungi are one of the major lineages of eukaryotes and the sister group of animals.  We will consider evolutionary relationships among different groups of fungi, their ecology and significance to humans.  We will explore fungal lifestyles, their reproduction, and the ways that fungi use to communicate with each other and with their symbiotic partners.  In addition to true fungi, we will study several distantly related groups of organisms that share with fungi absorptive nutrition, filamentous somatic structures, and spore-based reproduction.  We will reconstruct fungal phylogenies using molecular evolution methods.  We will also isolate fungi from the environment and identify them using morphological and molecular approaches.
outcome: Familiarity with methods of phylogeny reconstruction for taxonomic identification of organisms., Ability to characterize major groups of fungi and their life histories., Familiarity with different fungal nutrition modes: saprotrophy, biotrophy, hemibiotrophy, and necrotrophy., Appreciation of the links between fungal lifestyle and reproductive biology, i.e. loss of sex in mutualists vs. importance of recombination in parasites., Understanding principles that regulate fungal mating versus vegetative compatibility., Appreciation for the roles of fungi as: decomposers, mutualists of plants (endophytes, mycorrhizae, lichens) and animals (gut microbiota), pathogens of plants and animals, model systems for biology, sources of food, antibiotics, organic acids, allergens, toxins and carcinogens., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two semesters of general biology.

class: PLSCI 4450
class title: Urban Plants and Public Health
description: This class examines how urban plants affect public health (e.g., air pollution reduction, temperature regulation, etc.). We will also explore the causes and health consequences of variation in urban plant composition, environmental justice perspectives, the effects of policies and management approaches, and the impacts of climate change.
outcome: Describe the public health relevance of urban trees., Independently identify and interpret peer-reviewed journal articles and extract quantitative data from them., Analyze the public health consequences of plant-human interactions in a case study., Create written and verbal summaries of research findings from the case study., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college-level statistics course and experience reading peer-reviewed journal articles.

class: PLSCI 4520
class title: Berry Crops: Culture and Management
description: Study of the evolution, breeding history, and physiology of strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, blueberries, and other minor small fruit crops and of cultural practices that influence productivity, fruit quality, and pest damage. Also considers marketing and economics and discusses alternate production practices for both commercial and home gardeners. Frequent field trips enhance classroom activities.
outcome: Communicate the impact that berries have on local and national economies, human well-being and diet, and the role they play in American and world agriculture., Integrate information to produce high-quality berry crops at various scales in the most efficient and economical manner possible, with minimal impact on environmental quality., Explain the science behind various practices used in the production of berry crops., Produce a business plan for a berry farm., 

class: PLSCI 4530
class title: Light and Video Microscopy for Biologists
description: Students learn the relationship between reality and the image using philosophy, mathematics, and physical theory. Next they apply these tools theoretically and in practice to understand and become experts at image formation and analysis using brightfield, darkfield, phasecontract, fluorescence, polarization, interference, differential interference, and modulation contrast microscopes. They build upon our knowledge and experience to understand how analog image processors and digital image processors can influence, enhance, and analyze the images gathered by the microscope. Last they learn about many other kinds of microscopes, including confocal, near field, x-ray, acoustic, nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared, centrifuge, atomic force, and scanning tunneling microscopes.
outcome: Describe the relationship between an object and its image., Describe how light interacts with matter to yield information about the structure, composition and local environment of biological and other specimens., Describe how optical systems work. This will permit us to interpret the images obtained at high resolution and magnification., Gain practical experience with many types of light microscopy, and learn the procedures and the tricks necessary to become an excellent microscopist., Integrate philosophical and historical thinking, mathematical skills, as well as physical, chemical and biological insight to become an accomplished, scientifically accurate and accomplished microscopist with an artistic eye., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: college-level biology course.

class: PLSCI 4620
class title: Plant Biochemistry
description: Focuses on biochemistry of plant specific processes, with the aim to obtain an integrative overview of plant biochemistry. Examples include processes such as cell wall biochemistry, pigment biosynthesis and degradation, secondary metabolism, senescence, defense mechanisms, amino acid biosynthesis, and small molecule transport. Genomics-based experimental tools such as proteomics and metabolomics are discussed.
outcome: Describe a range of plant biochemical pathways and associated regulatory mechanisms (e.g., allosteric regulation, post-translational modifications, feedback regulation)., Articulate how those processes are different from, or share some features with, analogous systems in non-plant taxonomic groups, such as bacteria, yeast and mammals., Demonstrate insights into (sub)cellular compartmentalization of plant biochemical processes., Explain how multiple plant biochemical pathways intersect and influence each other., Discuss current literature in the field of plant biochemistry, including new analytical techniques, bioinformatics approaches and analytical paradigms in 'model' and 'non-model' experimental systems., Describe the importance of plant biochemistry in the areas of human health, agricultural biotechnology and new and emerging applications such as bioenergy and fine chemicals., Communicate key aspects of grant proposals to address central questions in both basic and applied plant biochemistry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 3420, plus BIOMG 3300 or BIOMG 3310.

class: PLSCI 4720
class title: Nutrient and Carbon Cycling and Management in Ecosystems
description: Building on knowledge of basic physico-chemical and microbial nutrient and carbon transformations in soil, we will examine the pathways of carbon and nutrients in ecosystems from the rhizosphere to the landscape level. An important aspect will be the understanding of environmental impacts by agriculture, forestry and agroforestry and the development of sustainable landus systems. We will explore various tracer methods for the study of carbon and nutrient cycling including stable and radio-isotopes as well as rare elements and biomarkers. You will expand you knowledge in discussion groups and through presentations and work in-depth on a project which involves both field and laboratory experimentation. The results of the project will be presented in a poster conference.
outcome: Design a research project and articulate the justification for research questions., Develop mechanistic hypotheses, choose appropriate methods for a certain problem, and interpret complex data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 2600.

class: PLSCI 4900
class title: Reflection on Plant Sciences Experiential Learning
description: This course is designed to guide Plant Sciences majors in developing career goals around an out-of-classroom experience, in reflecting on that experience, and in recording that experience in the student's ePortfolio. To that end, students will draw up a set of learning outcomes for an internship, research opportunity or extension experience in the Plant Sciences, which must be approved by their faculty advisor before the experience begins. The student must then develop a critical reflection on that experience and upload it into one's ePortfolio. 
outcome: Establish the goals/learning outcomes for the internship, research or extension experience before beginning the work., Evaluate the completed internship, research or extension experience as a complement to required and elective courses., Reflect on how the experience has provided new insights into the plant sciences and how it contributes to career goals., Articulate the internship or research experience for a lay audience., 

class: PLSCI 4925
class title: Plant Sciences Senior Portfolio
description: The purpose of this course is to demonstrate that Plant Sciences students will have met all learning outcomes in the major prior to graduation by documenting relevant in-class and co-curricular activities. Preparatory work will include observing and learning from a diversity of presentations in preparation for taking PLSCI 4950. The basis for evaluation will be an ePortfolio that the student develops. It will contain the following elements: a personal profile, career goals and exploration, leadership experiences, a current resume, examples of how the learning outcomes for the major have been met, and summaries of 14 plant-related seminars that the student has attended while at Cornell. The evaluation and assignment of a grade will be made by the student's advisor using a common rubric across the major. Ideally, students will enroll in this course in the second-to-last semester so any deficiencies can be addressed prior to graduation.
outcome: Acquire a broad grasp of current research across the Plant Science disciplines., Communicate how knowledge gained in seminars integrates with concepts acquired in previous coursework., Demonstrate interdisciplinary competency and mastery of the Plant Sciences's learning outcomes by documenting one's scholarship, training, and experience in an ePortfolio., Observe different scientific presentations and discern which factors contribute to an effective presentation., Build a stronger relationship with one's faculty advisor., Further develop a professional trajectory, including a resume and deeper career exploration., 

class: PLSCI 4960
class title: Undergraduate Internship in Plant Sciences
description: In this experiential learning opportunity, students participate in an agricultural- or plant science-related work and learning experience equivalent to a minimum of six weeks of full-time effort.
outcome: Specific learning goals for the experience are arranged between students, their faculty advisor, and the internship host., 

class: PLSCI 4970
class title: Individual Study in Plant Sciences
description: An opportunity for undergraduate individual study of a special topic in plant sciences under the direction of a faculty member.

class: PLSCI 4975
class title: Undergraduate Peer Mentoring and Leadership Development in SIPS
description: Being a club officer or a peer mentor is an opportunity to learn about leadership and collaboration, as well as communication and the challenges of balancing diverse responsibilities. Preparation in this arena can serve a student for life, from learning how to engage in the workplace to being involved in community organizations and learning responsibilities ranging from conflict management to serving as a fiscal steward. Opportunities for leadership development and growth will vary; in general, they include learning how to: foster inclusiveness and a healthy, positive social atmosphere among members and peers; respond to student concerns; communicate and collaborate effectively with staff, faculty advisors, and other faculty, staff, administrators and students; reflect on and articulate experiences with other mentors or club officers throughout the semester; and maintain the reputation, continuity and history of a Cornell organization.
outcome: Communicate and collaborate effectively with staff, advisors, faculty, staff, administrators, and students., Foster inclusiveness and a healthy, positive social atmosphere among members and peers., Recognize the signs of students in distress and respond appropriately., Communicate the breadth and depth of campus resources that assist students., Model excellent study habits, as well as how to engage with others in collaborative settings that foster learning., Collaborate with other mentors or club officers to increase peer-to-peer and peer-to-university professional interactions., Model and articulate how mistakes and failure are a natural part of the learning process, as well as an opportunity for growth., Model attributes of positive mentoring, including compassion, responsiveness, integrity, and confidentiality., 

class: PLSCI 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching Experience in Plant Sciences
description: Designed to give qualified undergraduate students teaching experience through actual involvement in planning and teaching plant sciences courses under the supervision of SIPS faculty members. May include leading discussion sections; preparing, assisting in, or teaching laboratories; and tutoring.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: previous enrollment in course to be taught or equivalent.

class: PLSCI 4990
class title: Independent Undergraduate Research in Plant Science
description: Affords opportunities for students to carry out independent research under appropriate supervision. Each student is expected to review pertinent literature, prepare a project outline, conduct the research, and prepare a report.
outcome: Identify a question or topic requiring original research through critical examination of existing literature., Formulate the question into one or more testable hypotheses or central arguments and develop methods suitable to evaluate these hypotheses or arguments., Obtain information relevant to the hypotheses or arguments through effective use of contemporary methods and research techniques., Critically analyze the evidence obtained to refute or support the hypotheses or arguments., Integrate the findings of this research to the findings of others and to larger issues in the discipline., Communicate effectively through writing the thesis and oral or poster presentations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: GPA of at least 3.0.

class: PLSCI 5000
class title: Annual and Perennial Plants in the Landscape
description: This course is an introduction to the identification, cultural requirements, and use of northern climate annual and perennial herbaceous plants in the landscape. Herbaceous plants are important parts of the landscape. They provide pollination resources and aid in habitat for fauna. In addition, they can add biodiversity and reduce stormwater runoff when used appropriately.
outcome: Recognize by sight the genus, species, and common name of approximately 100-plus herbaceous garden plants., Describe the site conditions under which to grow each of these plants., Comprehend aspects of design, establishment and management of annuals and perennials in the landscape., Create a chart comparing seasonal interest, ecological functions, and site conditions of all plants., 

class: PLSCI 5010
class title: Biology and Management of Plant Diseases
description: Biology and Management of Plant Diseases is an introduction to the world of diseases of plants and the biology of the pathogens that cause them. Students will gain an understanding of the concepts of plant pathology and apply them both philosophically and practically to achieve an understanding of how one would identify and address disease problems. Additional emphasis will be placed on how plant diseases and their management affect our lives and shape our culture.
outcome: Describe the concept of disease in both natural and agriculturally relevant plant systems and be able to apply concepts learned to address stakeholder queries on plant disease and injury in a practical setting., Articulate the basic biology of key plant pathogen groups: viruses, bacteria, nematodes, fungi, stramenopiles, and plants. Students will be able to explain topics on advanced pathogen biology to undergraduates and stakeholder audiences., Apply the essential tools of plant disease diagnostics and integrated management approaches to solve plant production problems for stakeholders., 

class: PLSCI 5015
class title: Hemp Production Systems
description: This course will provide students with knowledge of different hemp production systems for fiber, grain and cannabinoids. Students will gain an understanding of field, controlled environment, greenhouse, and high-tunnel production systems. Topics covered will include hemp physiology, agronomy, cultivation methods, cultivar selection, seed science, nutrition and fertility, harvest methods and post-harvest storage.
outcome: Describe basic hemp physiology and nutritional needs., Design and implement outdoor agricultural production systems used to grow hemp for fiber or grain., Design and implement outdoor agricultural production systems used to grow hemp for cannabinoids and terpenes., Design and implement controlled environment agricultural production systems used to grow hemp for cannabinoids and terpenes., 

class: PLSCI 5025
class title: Hydroponic Food Crop Production and Management
description: Covers principles and practices of commercial hydroponic vegetable and herb production in controlled environment agriculture (CEA). Topics include: growing environments (high tunnels, greenhouses, and warehouse/vertical farms), manipulation of and crop response to the aerial and root-zone environments including estimating energy use in diverse growing environments, nutrient solution preparation and management, aquaponics and organic hydroponics, crop maintenance, production scheduling, integrated pest management, business plan development, and markets. Laboratory session will reinforce lectures through hands-on practice of concepts. Students will be responsible for growing several crops including leafy greens, herbs, and vine crops (such as tomatoes and cucumbers).
outcome: Explain how hydroponic systems are designed to meet the physical, chemical, and biological needs of plant roots. Discuss the benefits and constraints of several different hydroponic systems., Articulate the ideal growing environment and plant response to temperature, light, and carbon dioxide for several of the most common hydroponic crops., Estimate the energy costs and crop yields in different growing environments., Demonstrate plant care and maintenance practices necessary to produce healthy hydroponic crops., Use a spreadsheet to develop fertilizer recipes for common hydroponic crops., Use a spreadsheet to estimate production costs and revenue of a hydroponic crop., Articulate how hydroponics relates to sustainable, organic, and local food production., 

class: PLSCI 5050
class title: Cultivating Community through Self-discovery and Skill Development
description: This course is designed primarily for students in the first semester of their MPS program in Integrative Plant Science. The intent is to guide these students in their path of career discovery by exploring their strengths, preferences and perspectives on their work in the world. Strategies will be introduced and practiced that will help students become a better team-member and leader. A component of the course will be assistance with the development of a capstone project.
outcome: Recognize important elements of self-identity, how identity differs among individuals and informs the way we engage with the world., Identify personal strengths and leadership attributes and apply these to define an individual leadership style., Utilize strategies to construct effective groups and resolve conflict., Define personal and career goals based on individual motivations., 

class: PLSCI 5110
class title: Field Crop Systems
description: Principles of field-crop production of food, feed, fiber and bioenergy. Includes introductory concepts of plant growth, development and maturation as they relate to crop performance and management, adaptation to soil, climatic and environmental conditions, tillage, mineral nutrition, pests, cropping sequences, management systems, and crop improvement. Grain, oilseed, biofuel and forage crops are emphasized. Lab report and term paper on field crop systems required. Designed for professional students or advanced undergraduates.
outcome: Recognize and identify the production constraints, nutritional characteristics, and storage conditions of the world's major food, feed, and forage crops., Identify the vegetative and flower morphologies of major cereal, legume, and forage crops., Describe the stages of root, shoot, and seed development in corn, soybean, and other crops., Apply the principles of crop science to explain the geographic distribution and response of crop species to differences in light, temperature, water status, and soil properties., Describe and demonstrate the impact of agroecosystems, cropping systems and management factors such as plant establishment, crop variety, soil mineral nutrition, pests, and diseases on the productivity and quality of crops., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)

class: PLSCI 5150
class title: Weed Biology and Management
description: This course examines components of the biology, ecology, and management of weeds in crop and non-crop ecosystems, particularly in the Northeastern United States. The first part of the course focuses on biological/ecological factors that govern seed dormancy, plant growth, population dynamics, competitiveness, reproduction, and survival. Close attention is given to accurate identification of plants and to characteristics that make weeds competitive, undesirable, or both. The second part of the course examines strategies to control weeds, including  their benefits and drawbacks. Aspects of chemical control, including classification, mode of action, selectivity, symptomotology, and resistance, are presented. Herbicide-tolerant crop (i.e., GMO) issues and health and environmental concerns of herbicide use are addressed. The use of integrated approaches to weed management is emphasized. 
outcome: Identify the different life stages of at least 90 weed species commonly found in the Northeastern United States and southern Canada., Identify and describe the major biological factors and ecological principles that influence weed growth, population dynamics, invasiveness, and survival., Describe the various strategies currently being used to control and/or suppress weeds in different crop and non-crop systems., Identify the classification, mode of action, selectivity, and symptomatology of commonly used herbicides., Calculate and apply the appropriate amount of a given herbicide that is required to treat a specific area using a backpack sprayer., Describe the diversity and impact that weeds have in different ecosystems., 

class: PLSCI 5190
class title: Cannabis: Biology, Society and Industry
description: The medical marijuana industry in the US is estimated at $6.7B, and is expected to grow to over $10B by 2021. Hemp-based product sales are projected to rise from $570M in 2015 to over $1B for 2019. According to Indeed.com (2018), 25 out of every 10,000 jobs currently listed are related to the cannabis industry, and from April to May 2018, there was a 50% jump in the number of cannabis related job listings. The potential profitability of cannabis is clear, but the obstacles to its economic and industrial development are significant and include establishing better agricultural supply chains, breeding research to develop more vigorous and disease resistant varieties, refining/improving farming practices, and identifying new markets. This course will explore the history, culture, pharmacology, breeding, horticulture and legal challenges associated with cannabis in an effort to inform and stimulate new ideas towards solving these problems, motivating future plant breeders, horticulturists, farmers, pharmacologists, and entrepreneurs to be successful in the cannabis industry. This course is suitable for life sciences majors.
outcome: Describe the historical importance of cannabis in the development of medicines, textiles, paper, construction materials, foods, as well as cultural, religious and recreational uses., Identify, assess and utlize a wide variety of reliable sources of information on cannabis., Articulate through writing and presentation assignments basic horticultural and farming best practices for cannabis cultivation., Work in a collaborative, multidisciplinary environment to develop an understanding of the opportunities and challenges in the cannabis industry today and in the future., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one college-level biology course or a plant production course, such as PLSCI 1101 or PLSCI 1900, is required.

class: PLSCI 5210
class title: Soil and Crop Management for Sustainability
description: Students learn about agronomy and recent advances in sustainable soil and crop management, and gain a lot of practical farming knowledge. Integrated perspectives on the physical, biological, and chemical aspects of soil management in the broader context of agroecosystems are explored. Soil and crop management practices and resulting interactions between soil, water, organisms, and organic and chemical inputs form the basis for discussions on diverse cropping systems, soil health, water quality and quantity, bioenergy, greenhouse gases, and sustainability.
outcome: Articulate the grand challenge of sustaining future world populations., Synthesize and evaluate concepts of sustainable soil and crop management, relate and integrate them into your personal experience through assigned readings, homework, writing, in-class discussion and group collaborative work., Recognize and describe basic soil physical, biological, and chemical processes through analysis, graphing (in Excel), and interpretation of data for laboratory and homework activities., Summarize factors affecting soil management and crop production, and describe common criteria used to evaluate the sustainability of cropping systems., Use technologies (including Adapt-N) and cite policies related to the management of soil and crops., Apply what you learn from reading, lectures, hands-on experience, and the use of commonly used management tools to assess, plan, and modify sustainable soil management practices., 

class: PLSCI 5290
class title: Remote Sensing and Modeling for Ecosystems
description: This course introduces advanced concepts of remote sensing and numerical modeling, with hands-on experience in data acquisition, processing, and interpretation. This course aims to explore key questions facing the agronomic and natural eco-systems using remote sensing techniques and ecological modeling at various scales. It provides hands-on experience in remote sensing techniques and using datasets/tools and model simulations to address research questions.
outcome: Describe the basic principles in remote sensing., Describe the spectral signatures of land surface properties and appropriate application., Acquire satellite dataset from NASA, ESA, and Google Earth Engine., Process remote sensing data using ENVI, and R (or Python)., Run mechanistic model simulations in the CLM framework., Apply remote sensing observations and model simulations to interpret agro-ecological phenomena., Conduct an independent applications-based project., Develop and present an oral and collaborative group project., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of the basics of remote sensing, calculus, physics, and programming skills, and some background in agro-ecosystems.

class: PLSCI 5450
class title: Basic Plant Anatomy
description: Descriptive course with equal emphasis on development and mature structure. Lecture, laboratory, and reading are integrated in a study guide. The laboratory offers the opportunity to develop the practical skills required to make anatomical diagnoses and to write anatomical descriptions.
outcome: Describe the variety of anatomical data and concepts to identify the organization of plant histology and morphology., Perform practical diagnosis on anatomical "unknowns.", Use the necessary tools to identify plant anatomical forms, function and evolutionary diversity based on comparative studies of several taxa among vascular plants., 

class: PLSCI 5575
class title: Principles of Vegetable Production
description: Commercial vegetable production from variety selection to postharvest. Topics include crop physiology and culture, soil and pest management, stand establishment, marketing, and history of production. Term project required. Field trips to large-scale conventional, small, diversified, and organic farms are planned early in the semester.
outcome: Describe the scale of the vegetable industry from the local to international markets and the challenges facing producers., Appraise how successful vegetable production is related to soil health, cultural practices, pest management and marketing and develop a farm plan that considers all aspects of production and marketing for one vegetable crop., Demonstrate the ability to diagnose common vegetable problems and offer solutions., Develop the ability to grow a wide variety of vegetables either commercially or as a gardener., 

class: PLSCI 5600
class title: Soil Science
description: Designed for undergraduate and graduate students interested in a comprehensive introduction to Soil Science from both an environmental and management perspective as well as graduate students who wish to advanced their understanding of the biogeochemical (biologic, hydrologic and mineral interfaces and linkages underpinning and controlling the soil, plant and atmospheric continuum. This course examines the dynamic relationship of soils with the environment and will place particular focus on both the larger landscape as well as site specific implications of this relationship. The course is flipped with online lectures, in-class homework, projects and activities as well as a weekly laboratory and is presented in three components.
outcome: Describe and explain the distribution and variability of soils and their properties across the landscape., Display a knowledge of how these properties are created and how they affect landscape processes (both at a large and small scale)., Demonstrate a preliminary ability to investigate soil characteristics., Exhibit an understanding of how we manage (or not) soils and their properties for multiple objectives., Communicate insight into the environment's drivers of the pedosphere that underpin all earth systems and their area of study., Produce an initial concept/content design for post baccalaureate programs as applicable., 

class: PLSCI 6017
class title: Cropping Systems Ecology
description: Crop ecology is the integrative study of biological, physical, social, and technological factors that govern the emergent properties arising from cropping systems at different spatial and temporal scales. It implicitly recognizes that achieving the goals for multi-functional (i.e. 'sustainable') agriculture cannot be achieved without understanding the functional interdependencies among these factors. This course serves as a graduate-level synthesis of 1) how crop and crop communities are influenced by the physical and chemical growth environment, 2) how the growth environment is modified by agronomy and, in turn, 3) how production processes are shaped by both managed and unmanaged factors. Readings and class discussions of key concepts compose the first half of the course, with the hands-on application of systems analysis tools emphasized in the second half.
outcome: Identify environmental drivers of crop performance and characterize how they vary in time and space., Apply foundational crop growth and development concepts at the individual plant and community level to understand productivity outcomes., Quantify how agronomic management affects the biophysical environment and shapes productivity outcomes., Use predictive models of the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum to characterize emergent properties of cropping systems under different scenarios of change., 

class: PLSCI 6020
class title: Plant Propagation
description: Plant propagation, the multiplication of plants, is both a science and an art. This class will introduce the principles, practices and techniques of sexual and asexual propagation of horticultural plants. Emphasis is placed on learning the techniques that are involved with the many aspects of plant propagation as well as the science behind the methods. The art of plant propagation will be learned through hands-on experiences with seed propagation, cutting propagation, grafting &amp; budding systems, layering, specialized plant structures (bulbs, corms, etc.), and tissue culture for micropropagation. In addition, propagation media, greenhouse environmental control and management, and plant care, as they relate to propagation, will be emphasized. The science behind the methods that are learned will be explained in order to develop a better understanding of plant propagation and how to make it successful. This knowledge base and the practical, hands-on experiences will give students the ability to better solve problems that arise during the propagation and growth of plants.
outcome: Demonstrate proficiency in the propagation of plants through seeds, cuttings, grafting, layering, and micropropagation., Recognize how the different environmental conditions, types of plants, and growth stages of plants affect the success of plant propagation., Think critically about plant propagation and the different techniques and applications that are used for its success., 

class: PLSCI 6030
class title: Genetic Improvement of Crop Plants
description: Genetic enhancement of crop value to humans began with domestication and continues with farmers' variety development and scientifically trained plant breeders' applications of Mendelian, quantitative, and molecular genetics. This course examines crop genetic improvement methods by discussing the history and current practice of plant breeding, tools available to breeders, decision-making about breeding objectives and methods, and the roles of plant breeding in addressing global challenges including climate change, sustainability, equity, food security, and malnutrition.
outcome: Value the contribution of Indigenous groups in domestication of modern crops and their cultural significance., Explain the genetics that control plant characteristics and how genes can be manipulated to improve plant traits., Describe the reproductive mechanisms in crop and horticultural plants., Explain the range of phenotypic traits that are important targets for genetic improvement of plants, and the social and environmental contexts of their trait values, Describe the range of phenotypic and genomic selection techniques and approaches used by plant breeders., Explain the different approaches used to breed self- and cross-pollinated crops and the development of hybrids., Describe recurrent selection techniques., Describe the roles of tissue culture and genetic transformation in plant improvement., Explore the contributions of plant breeding to agriculture and food systems., Summarize concisely in writing the objectives, main results, and conclusions described in primary research papers in plant breeding and genetics., 

class: PLSCI 6070
class title: Nutritional Quality Improvement of Food Crops
description: The nutrients in human diets are ultimately derived from plants. However, the edible portions of the world's most extensively grown staple food crops are poor sources for numerous micronutrients and health-promoting compounds that are essential for sustaining and enhancing life. The improvement of crop nutritional quality through breeding, termed biofortification, is a sustainable strategy being used to address micronutrient deficiences worldwide. This course covers recent progress on crop nutritional quality trait improvement. The lectures will focus on vitamins, minerals, prebiotics, phytonutrients, essential amino acids, and fatty acids in the context of better human nutrition and health.
outcome: Articulate why there is a compelling need for improving the nutritional quality of food crops., Explain the approaches and mechanisms used for nutritional quality improvement., Describe the status of development and commercialization of nutrient-dense crops., Demonstrate improvement in the ability to write and speak to scientific audiences., Deliver advanced materials to the class, deconstruct a topic, and provide a deep interpretation of data., 

class: PLSCI 6080
class title: Methods of Plant Breeding Laboratory
description: Field trips to plant breeding programs involve discussion of breeding methods used, overall goals, selection and screening techniques, and variety and germplasm release. Additional labs include selection techniques for various traits, intellectual property issues, genetically modified crops, and international agriculture. For a term project, each student designs a comprehensive breeding program on a chosen crop.
outcome: Design a breeding program to improve both quantitative and qualitative traits in plants., Describe the impact that plant breeding has on community and global health and well-being., Convey to professional and lay audiences, orally and in writing, information about the organization and scope of a plant breeding program., Articulate a vision for the future trends that will transform plant breeding in the coming decade., 

class: PLSCI 6095
class title: Practicum in Plant Breeding
description: In-depth, practical exposure to applied crop breeding. Students participate in the department's maize, small grains, potato, pepper, squash, forage, tomato, and onion breeding programs to gain hands-on experience in the planning and implementation of crossing, planting, harvesting, selecting, and evaluating disease and quality traits.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 4030.

class: PLSCI 6230
class title: Equitable Crop Improvement: From Theory to Practice
description: This course explores how global crop improvement processes and outcomes can address social inequalities from design to implementation and impact. It covers a broad range of topics, offering perspective on how systematic social inequalities shape whose priorities are served by crop improvement programs locally, and globally. Drawing from theory and methodology across diverse disciplines, this course encourages students to critically analyze mainstream crop improvement paradigms with an equity lens, and design more inclusive alternatives.
outcome: Describe key issues and concepts related to equity and social inclusion in global crop improvement., Identify systematic oppression at multiple levels, and how these limit the representation and voice of historically marginalized groups in crop improvement theory and practice., Describe how interdisciplinary (bridging social and biophysical sciences) crop improvement research is conceptualized and practiced., Explain how social science theories, methods, and data enable equitable crop improvement processes and outcomes., Describe how equitable crop improvement principles and strategies are applied across a product development pipeline, from varietal design to selection and release through critical analysis and case studies., Demonstrate knowledge and awareness of the cultural practices, values, and beliefs of diverse groups of individuals., Assess one's own cultural perspective and the potential for associated biases, and how these may shape scientific practice in crop improvement research., Respectfully communicate and collaborate across difference with individuals from different identities, disciplines and backgrounds., Interpret qualitative and quantitative social science data to inform crop improvement decisions in design, selection, and dissemination., Critically analyze crop improvement research programs to formulate recommendations for more equitable research processes and outcomes., 

class: PLSCI 6250
class title: Data-Model Fusion in Research
description: This hands-on class trains graduate students on integrating data with models via data-model fusion to address scientific questions in research. Students will learn about modeling and the nature of data by integrating their own data with relevant models. Students will identify appropriate data to constrain their own models using various techniques, e.g., data assimilation and machine learning, in data-model fusion.
outcome: Integrate data with models., Improve model predictions with data from multiple sources., Synthesize data into diverse models for predicting biological and ecological responses., Apply skills of data-model fusion to solve various issues in agricultural and life sciences., 

class: PLSCI 6300
class title: Mycology
description: Fungi are one of the major lineages of eukaryotes and the sister group of animals.  We will consider evolutionary relationships among different groups of fungi, their ecology and significance to humans.  We will explore fungal lifestyles, their reproduction, and the ways that fungi use to communicate with each other and with their symbiotic partners.  In addition to true fungi, we will study several distantly related groups of organisms that share with fungi absorptive nutrition, filamentous somatic structures, and spore-based reproduction.  We will reconstruct fungal phylogenies using molecular evolution methods.  We will also isolate fungi from the environment and identify them using morphological and molecular approaches.
outcome: Familiarity with methods of phylogeny reconstruction for taxonomic identification of organisms.

., Ability to characterize major groups of fungi and their life histories., Familiarity with different fungal nutrition modes: saprotrophy, biotrophy, hemibiotrophy, and necrotrophy., Appreciation of the links between fungal lifestyle and reproductive biology, i.e. loss of sex in mutualists vs. importance of recombination in parasites., Understanding principles that regulate fungal mating versus vegetative compatibility., Appreciation for the roles of fungi as: decomposers, mutualists of plants (endophytes, mycorrhizae, lichens) and animals (gut microbiota), pathogens of plants and animals, model systems for biology, sources of food, antibiotics, organic acids, allergens, toxins and carcinogens., 

class: PLSCI 6350
class title: Tools for Thought
description: Discusses readings from Kuhn, Waddington, Wilson, Lewontin, and others emphasizing application of the philosophy of science to the real-world practices of scientists.
outcome: Describe some of the major 20th-century themes in the philosophy of science., Articulate the standards of scientific practices., Question the epistemological bias and grounding of published research as well as one's own current and future endeavors., 

class: PLSCI 6410
class title: Laboratory in Plant Biology
description: Includes selected experiments on gene expression, biolistic transformation, confocal microscopy, laser capture microdissection, microarray analysis, genetic mapping and mutant analysis, transposon tagging, proteomics, and metabolite analysis.
outcome: Demonstrate a set of methods for performing experiments with plant material in the laboratory and be able to follow and use experimental protocols., Describe what information can be gained by a particular type of experimentation or data analysis as well as the limitations of the methods., Formulate testable hypotheses and select available experimental techniques or analytical methods in order to draw defensible and creative conclusions., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite for undergraduates: BIOMG 2800 or PLSCI 2250, plus BIOMG 3300 or BIOMG 3310 or BIOMG 3350.

class: PLSCI 6440
class title: Digital Plant Science: Frontiers and Challenges
description: This course will provide a foundation in Digital Plant Science by introducing major questions and opportunities to be addressed in digital plant science (DPS). Weekly case studies will be taught by different Cornell faculty experts who are working in the area of DPS. Meeting twice weekly, Tuesday lectures and class discussions will introduce the faculty expert's subdiscipline of DPS research, followed by a DPS research presented by the same faculty expert on Thursday of the same week. Thus, the Tuesday lecture will provide the needed scientific background enabling students to understand the Thursday seminar content. This new DPS seminar series will be required for all NRT-funded graduate trainees, but will be open to all graduate students, faculty, and staff across the Cornell campus.
outcome: Describe the diverse aspects of Digital Plant Science applications., Explain how computer science and engineering strategies are used to study genotype-to-phenotype relationships in plants at multiple scales, from single cells, to organisms to complex ecosystems., Apply digital Plant Science strategies and principles to their own thesis research., Articulate the value of synergistic, interdisciplinary approaches in the study of plant science., 

class: PLSCI 6450
class title: Urban Plants and Public Health
description: This class examines how urban plants affect public health (e.g., air pollution reduction, temperature regulation, etc.). We will also explore the causes and health consequences of variation in urban plant composition, environmental justice perspectives, the effects of policies and management approaches, and the impacts of climate change.
outcome: Describe the public health relevance of urban trees., Independently identify and interpret peer-reviewed journal articles and extract quantitative data from them., Analyze the public health consequences of plant-human interactions in a case study., Create written and verbal summaries of research findings from the case study., Synthesize case studies into a submission-ready manuscript., 

class: PLSCI 6490
class title: Current Topics in Fungal Biology
description: In-depth analysis and discussion of current scientific literature focused on the genetics, genomics, cell and molecular biology, and evolution of fungi.
outcome: Synthesize and present scientific arguments and evaluate them in the context of published literature., Integrate quantitative and qualitative data to reach defensible conclusions and compare them to conclusions presented in the scientific literature., Evaluate and effectively interpret factual claims, theories, and assumptions in the current fungal biology scientific literature., Communicate data, claims, and theories effectively with peers., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOMG 2800 or PLSCI 2250 required for undergraduates; equivalent background in molecular biology and genetics coursework required for graduate students.

class: PLSCI 6520
class title: Berry Crops: Culture and Management
description: Study of the evolution, breeding history, and physiology of strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, blueberries, and other minor small fruit crops and of cultural practices that influence productivity, fruit quality, and pest damage. Also considers marketing and economics and discusses alternate production practices for both commercial and home gardeners. Frequent field trips enhance classroom activities.
outcome: Communicate the impact that berries have on local and national economies, human well-being and diet, and the role they play in American and world agriculture., Integrate information to produce high-quality berry crops at various scales in the most efficient and economical manner possible, with minimal impact on environmental quality., Explain the science behind various practices used in the production of berry crops., Produce a business plan for a berry farm., Exhibit leadership and team-building skills in the conduct of a multi-faceted study and report., 

class: PLSCI 6560
class title: Topics in Plant Evolution
description: Series of selected topics to provide a background in plant evolution, paleobotanical literature, and evolutionary theory. Among the topics discussed are: the origin of a terrestrial flora, the evolution of the seed plants, and the origin and adaptive radiation of the angiosperms.
outcome: Integrate and evaluate opposing points of view., Describe the role of fossil evidence in understanding plant evolution, biogeography, paleoecology, and hypothesis testing., Explain some basic principles of plant evolutionary biology., Describe the history of plant life on earth., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college-level coursework in evolution.

class: PLSCI 6610
class title: Diagnostic Lab Experience
description: For graduate students and advanced undergraduates with a special interest in diagnosing plant diseases. Students work in the Diagnostic Laboratory (section of Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology) under supervision of the diagnostician.

class: PLSCI 6620
class title: Plant Biochemistry
description: Focuses on biochemistry of plant specific processes, with the aim to obtain an integrative overview of plant biochemistry. Examples include processes such as cell wall biochemistry, pigment biosynthesis and degradation, secondary metabolism, senescence, defense mechanisms, amino acid biosynthesis, and small molecule transport. Genomics-based experimental tools such as proteomics and metabolomics are discussed.
outcome: Describe a range of plant biochemical pathways and associated regulatory mechanisms (e.g., allosteric regulation, post-translational modifications, feedback regulation)., Articulate how those processes are different from, or share some features with, analogous systems in non-plant taxonomic groups, such as bacteria, yeast and mammals., Demonstrate insights into (sub)cellular compartmentalization of plant biochemical processes., Explain how multiple plant biochemical pathways intersect and influence each other., Discuss current literature in the field of plant biochemistry, including new analytical techniques, bioinformatics approaches and analytical paradigms in 'model' and 'non-model' experimental systems., Describe the importance of plant biochemistry in the areas of human health, agricultural biotechnology and new and emerging applications such as bioenergy and fine chemicals., Communicate key aspects of grant proposals to address central questions in both basic and applied plant biochemistry., 

class: PLSCI 6720
class title: Nutrient and Carbon Cycling and Management in Ecosystems
description: Building on knowledge of basic physico-chemical and microbial nutrient and carbon transformations in soil, we will examine the pathways of carbon and nutrients in ecosystems from the rhizosphere to the landscape level. An important aspect will be the understanding of environmental impacts by agriculture, forestry and agroforestry and the development of sustainable landus systems. We will explore various tracer methods for the study of carbon and nutrient cycling including stable and radio-isotopes as well as rare elements and biomarkers. You will expand you knowledge in discussion groups and through presentations and work in-depth on a project which involves both field and laboratory experimentation. The results of the project will be presented in a poster conference.
outcome: Design a research project and articulate the justification for research questions., Develop mechanistic hypotheses, choose appropriate methods for a certain problem, and interpret complex data., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PLSCI 2600 and BIOEE 4780. Advanced knowledge of biological and chemical processes is beneficial.

class: PLSCI 6820
class title: Graduate Student Research Updates
description: Weekly graduate student seminar series. Guests with an interest in plant pathology research are welcome to attend. Classes meet simultaneously in Geneva and Ithaca and are linked by teleconference.

class: PLSCI 6831
class title: Concepts and Techniques in Plant Biology
description: This course is the first of a two-semester sequence (with PLSCI 6841) which together provide a broad overview of concepts related to the study of plant molecular biology. It is intended to bring first-year graduate students in plant molecular biology to a common background in genetics, biochemistry and phylogenetics.
outcome: Identify and describe key research areas related to plant molecular biology., Explain, give relevant examples of, and make predictions using fundamental concepts of biochemistry, genetics and phylogeny., Integrate these same concepts into their understanding and interpretation of experimental techniques and interpretation of results., Articulate how experimental techniques constrain interpretation of experimental data., Evaluate current literature., 

class: PLSCI 6900
class title: Graduate Individual Study
description: Individual study for graduate students in the School of Integrative Plant Science under the direction of a faculty member.

class: PLSCI 6940
class title: Special Topics in Plant Sciences
description: The School of Integrative Plant Science offers graduate-level "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the school before the semester starts. Courses offered under the number will be approved by the Plant Sciences Curriculum Committees, and the same course is not offered more than twice under this number.

class: PLSCI 7000
class title: School of Integrative Plant Science Seminars
description: Weekly seminars on selected topics in plant biology, plant breeding and genetics, plant pathology and plant-microbe biology,  horticulture, and soil and crop science, as presented by faculty, graduate students and guest speakers. Students will have opportunities to be exposed to advances in plant science disciplines, learn how scientific data are collected, analyzed and presented, network with speakers, and engage in dialog about research, extension and teaching topics.
outcome: Describe advances on a breadth of topics in the fields of plant biology, plant breeding and genetics, horticulture, and soil and crop science., Articulate new insights on investigative and analytical methods used by presenters., 

class: PLSCI 7201
class title: Advanced Statistics and Experimental Design
description: This course will provide a comprehensive introduction to experimental designs that are commonly used in plant science and provide participants with the practical coding skills necessary to analyze data from such designs. This basic knowledge will be extended to accommodate high-dimensional data generated by modern 'omics techniques. This course will provide a foundational introduction of experimental designs and statistical analyses to guide independent research and avoid mistakes that are often made by new scientists. While this course will cover a wide range of topics, it is by no means an exhaustive coverage of experimental design and statistics. Students are strongly encouraged to complement the foundational knowledge learned in this course with classes on advanced statistical methods and/or experimental design.
outcome: Interpret experimental designs that are commonly used in plant science and plant breeding., Apply and interpret linear models to account for systematic effects in commonly used experimental designs., Extend classical experimental designs and statistical frameworks to challenges and limitations associated with high-dimensional 'omics data., Apply these concepts to meet independent research objectives., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: undergraduate-level course in statistics.

class: PLSCI 7440
class title: Graduate Research in Plant Biology
description: After the first year, students present one seminar per year on their thesis research and then meet with their thesis committee members for evaluation. First-year students only attend the seminar series; they do not present. Second-year students give a 25-minute seminar, while students in their third and higher years present a 50-minute seminar.
outcome: Describe their personal research as a coherent story., Engage an audience as part of a graduate symposium., Employ different strategies and approaches in presenting scientific content to academic audiences., 

class: PLSCI 7450
class title: Current Papers in Plant Biology
description: Students in this class read and discuss recently published papers in plant molecular biology. A faculty member from the Plant Biology Section in the School of Integrative Plant Science will assign the reading material and facilitate student discussions. To enable in-depth review and discussion, the literature reading in each semester will have a common theme, which will generally be based on the research interests and expertise of the faculty mentor.

class: PLSCI 7980
class title: Graduate Teaching Experience in Plant Sciences
description: Designed to give graduate students teaching experience through involvement in planning and teaching courses under the supervision of SIPS faculty members. May include leading discussion sections; preparing, assisting in, or teaching lectures and laboratories; and tutoring.
outcome: Explain course content effectively to others., Appreciate the diversity of student learning styles and associated needs., Develop their own teaching philosophy., Critically self-reflect in order to enhance their skills and/or performance., Engage students in the learning process., Develop effective classroom materials (i.e., PowerPoint presentations, lab experiences, review sheets)., Demonstrate respect for all students and their inclusive communities., 

class: PLSCI 8900
class title: Master of Science Thesis Research
description: Thesis research for Master of Science degree candidates in the School of Integrative Plant Science.
outcome: Develop original hypotheses based on a review of the existing literature., Design experiments that can result in statistically valid hypothesis testing., Analyze data to measure statistically valid trends and differences among treatments., Draw conclusions from trends and patterns in the data., Discuss how conclusions contribute to the body of knowledge on the research topic., 

class: PLSCI 9900
class title: PhD Dissertation Research
description: Dissertation research for PhD candidates in the School of Integrative Plant Science. 
outcome: Develop original hypotheses based on a review of the existing literature., Design experiments that can result in statistically valid hypothesis testing., Analyze data to measure statistically valid trends and differences among treatments., Draw conclusions from trends and patterns in the data., Discuss how conclusions contribute to the body of knowledge on the research topic., 

class: PMA 1125
class title: FWS: The Undead...Live! Vampires on Stage Vampires.
description: Vampires are everywhere. This course hunts the dangerous and subversive figure of the vampire across a variety of pages, stages and screens. From raucous stage comedies, to lush cinematic epics and politically savvy television--and all the Draculas that have come and gone in between--we will explore how the vampire changes with medium, period, and genre. Students will be asked to consider why vampires emerge in particular historical and contemporary moments, and what cultural anxieties they articulate, as well as how the vampire is constructed, appropriated, and performed. By engaging with course texts, students will develop strategies for attentive reading and thoughtful writing. Assignments will vary in style and format, and will focus on critical thinking, preparation, clear prose, and papers structured around well-supported claims.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PMA 1168
class title: FWS: Your Fave is Problematic: Media, Fandom, and Race
description: Do you enjoy watching video essays about your problematic faves on YouTube or TikTok and want to try your hand at making one of your own? Essays offering critical analysis of media objects and fandoms are an increasingly popular form of user-generated content and information dissemination. This Fisrt-Year Writing Seminar will give students a chance to dip their toes into discourse surrounding media and fandom as it relates to race. Students will write on the topic of race while engaging readings from the fields of Fandom, Performance, and Media Studies. The ultimate goal of this course is to provide students with tools to effectively communicate critical analysis using their favorite media objects and/or fandoms using clear, concise, accessible writing.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PMA 1179
class title: FWS: Witch Hunts, Welfare, and Warfare: A Cultural History of Reproductive Medicine
description: The repeal of Roe v. Wade marks a reproductive crisis in the US, but reproductive injustice has a long history. While the Pill and the IUD are crucial for reproductive choice, they have also been tools of reproductive control. This course offers a critical and cultural history of reproductive medicine and its relationship to patriarchy, capitalism, and imperialism. Students will learn about the birth of modern gynecology, the entanglements between progressive welfare and fascist warfare, and organized resistance against reproductive control. We will engage a variety of historical media and read texts from the history of race and gender in science, media studies, Marxism, and Black and Indigenous feminisms. Assignments invite students to write formal papers and produce their own creative multimedia work.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PMA 1180
class title: FWS: Femininities: Race, Feminism, and Media
description: Is beauty, sexiness, Barbie, or the color pink feminine? What or who defines femininity? In our contemporary culture, such ideas are complicated by the performances of drag queens, sex workers, divas, and queer/trans artists of color. By exploring programs like the Real Housewives series, the film Hustlers, spoken word poetry, visual art, and related critical materials by such writers as bell hooks and Audre Lorde, this class will help you better understand the cultural politics of femininity in its relations to race and feminism. Gender expression and our responses to it are shaped by social and political forces that include race, migration, colonialism, and sexuality. Engaging such perspectives, we will write about our favorite divas, make zines, and analyze together films and other popular media forms.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PMA 1181
class title: FWS: Love and the Environment
description: How does love shape an environment? How do we perceive the space where love ends and the environment begins, or can we? How are relationships co-creating space? With what can we cultivate a greater intimacy?  These are some of the questions we will explore creatively and rhetorically this semester. We will consider "love" from the theoretical framework of black feminist, queer, and indigenous thought to expand the concept from western romantic notions to explore intimacies of various formations—platonic, communal, familial, spiritual, natural--through the lens of ecopoetics. I use the term 'environment' to invoke scene/setting, natural/ecological perspectives, and interpersonal space. We will engage with varieties of text--poetry to performance art to film--and have 6 writing assignments, 5 essays and 1 experimental work, with opportunities for revision.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PMA 1182
class title: FWS: Speaking Bodies, Dancing Knowledge in the Caribbean
description: This course examines the pasts, presents, and futures of dance in the Caribbean. From nightclub performances to sacred rituals, we will consider how factors such as discrimination, tourism, migration, and globalization have impacted various dance forms and the ways in which they are staged, practiced, or experienced today. We will watch documentary films, stage performances, and music videos that feature influential artists such as Katherine Dunham, Alicia Alonso, Celia Cruz, Ivy Queen, Romeo Santos, and Bad Bunny. We will also read critical dance studies articles to help us develop informed written reflections. Students will write five formal essays discussing different dance styles and issues related to migration, tourism, globalization, and race/gender/class relations in the Caribbean, and in preparation, submit topic proposals, drafts, and peer-review exercises.

class: PMA 1410
class title: Media Production Laboratory
description: The Media Production Lab course is a series of self-contained lecture/workshops on various topics in the production of film and video on-set and on-location. The workshops will be hands on experience with cameras, lighting and sound equipment, exploring the technique of cinematography as well as, lighting, sound, and grip techniques for the studio and in the field. We will cover specific areas such as dollies and rigging, location sound, and production protocol.  Open to all skill levels.

class: PMA 1610
class title: Production Technology Laboratory
description: This technology lab will provide students with a foundation of the production process through experiential learning of scenographic practices. Students will learn about the technical production processes as they pertain too: scenery fabrication and installation, properties fabrication, costume fabrication, and lighting installation (primarily lighting for live performance).

class: PMA 1611
class title: Rehearsal and Performance
description: Students participating in a PMA creative project led by a faculty member or PMA Guest Artist can earn PMA 1611 credit.

class: PMA 2100
class title: Introduction to Performing and Media Arts
description: This course is designed to offer students a broad, foundational introduction to the mission of the Department of Performing and Media Arts. With a focus both on making artistic work in mediated forms and in live performance and on the critical methods for studying such artwork, we explore a variety of topics and concepts, from composition and gesture to sound and movement—and beyond. Joined by visiting guest experts from all across the PMA faculty, the instructors usher students through a range of approaches to creative authorship, design, embodied performance, history, and theory. Organized around a series of keywords, including adaptation, representation, transformation, and world-building, the course also foregrounds ways of thinking about and with categories of identity and social relations, such as ability, age, class, ethnicity, gender, race, and sexuality.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2221
class title: Contemporary Movement Practices
description: Contemporary Movement Practices is an intermediate-level studio immersion in contemporary concert dance genres and methodologies germane to the 21st-century field. In-depth modules will extract and explore most notably from Bartenieff Fundamentals℠ and Countertechnique®, as well as ripen the sensibility and capacity for current trends and approaches to dynamic floorwork, such as Flying-Low®. The objective is to cultivate and champion a dynamic anatomy and body consciousness built on learned perception, sensation, and organization. This is achieved through the experiential research and framing of Total Body Connectivity, which is based on the perennial work of Irmgard Bartenieff: Breath, Head/Tail, Core/Distal, Upper/Lower Body, Body Halves, and Diagonal.

class: PMA 2280
class title: Dance Improvisation
description: The training and practice of skills for the spontaneous collaborative composition of movement performance. Students hone their abilities to invent and respond to each other and their environment to produce dances that engage their audience. This course coaxes inspiration, seeking to make it reliable and to keep it surprising. It offers the possibility of "training" one's movement instincts to respond relevantly and with spontaneity.

class: PMA 2300
class title: Dance Composition
description: Students compose and present short studies that are discussed and reworked. Problems are defined and explored through class improvisations. Informal showing at end of semester. Includes informal showing of work. Weekly assignments in basic elements of choreography.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2403
class title: Africa in Hollywood
description: In Eddie Murphy's Coming to America, Africa is a place of nobility, where even lions are at peace with lambs. In contrast, Leonardo DeCaprio's Blood Diamond is a violent look at the role the demand for diamonds has played in destabilizing mineral-rich African countries. But if Hollywood has long been concerned with depicting Africa in particular ways, African filmmakers are at the same time creating their own stories. Popular and scholarly film critics are also contributing to the battle over who speaks for Africa. In this course we will explore these competing images of Africa, questions of imagination versus reality, and the extent to which artists should, if at all, be responsible to the subject of their art.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2404
class title: Story Ideation, Creation, and Development
description: This course centers on story creation, development and presentation. Students learn what makes a great story for the screen and how to take it from concept to pitch. Over the course of the semester through writing assignments and discussion, students practice creating, developing, analyzing, and pitching original stories for film and television.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2435
class title: New Visions in African Cinema
description: This undergraduate course introduces the formal and topical innovations that African cinema has experienced since its inception in the 1960s. Sections will explore, among others, Nollywood, sci-fi, and ideological cinema. Films include: Abderrahmane Sissako's Bamako, Mohamed Camara's Dakan, Djibril Diop Mambéty's Touki-Bouki, Cheikh Oumar Sissoko's Finzan, Anne-Laure Folly's Women with Open Eyes, Ousmane Sembène's Camp de Thiaroye, Jean-Pierre Bekolo's Quartier Mozart.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2560
class title: American Cinema
description: From the beginning of the twentieth century to the present moment, movies - and in particular Hollywood - have profoundly influenced the ways in which people see, think and talk about the world. Focusing mostly on Hollywood film, this course introduces the study of American cinema from multiple perspectives: as an economy and mode of production; as an art form that produces particular aesthetic styles; as a cultural institution that comments on contemporary issues and allows people to socialize. We will consider the rise of Hollywood in the age of mass production; the star system; the introduction of sound and the function of the soundtrack; Hollywood's rivalry with television; censorship; the rise of independent film, etc. Weekly screenings introduce major American genres (e.g. science fiction, film noir, the musical) and directors (e.g. Hitchcock, Kubrick, Tarantino).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2610
class title: Production Crew Laboratory
description: Learn what it means to run a live show. Participate as part of a team to ensure all the elements work together and on time. Learn the intricacies of collaborating with a production group to create a unified artistic vision. Program lighting, sound, or video boards, or participate as a dresser, stage crew member, or assistant stage manager.

class: PMA 2611
class title: Stage Management Laboratory
description: This lab will give students practical experience as an assistant stage manager in the organization and management of a theatrical or mediated production; in rehearsals, in technical rehearsals as the scenographic elements are implemented, and in performance or filming for a fully supported department production under the supervision of the staff stage manager.  The course can only be applied to a fully supported department production with a full rehearsal period and performance.

class: PMA 2670
class title: Shakespeare
description: This course aims to give students a good historical and critical grounding in Shakespeare's drama and its central and continuing place in Renaissance culture and beyond. We will read poetry and primarily plays representing the shape of Shakespeare's career as it moves through comedies, histories, tragedies, and a romance.  Specific plays include The Two Gentleman of Verona, Richard II, Henry IV (Part 1), Henry V, Hamlet, Measure for Measure, Othello, Macbeth and The Tempest. We will focus on dramatic forms (genres), Shakespeare's themes, and social and historical contexts. The course combines lectures and hands-on work in weekly discussions.  While we will view some scenes from film adaptations, the main focus is on careful close interaction with the language of the plays. This class counts toward the pre-1800 requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 2701
class title: Media Arts, Performance, and Sound: Intersections
description: This interdisciplinary course offers an introduction to the methods employed in media arts, sound and performance. It provides a comprehensive exploration of the strategies and historical context of these disciplines. Students will engage in an interdisciplinary studio setting with a specific focus on one of these areas. Through hands-on experience, they will delve into contemporary artistic practices, honing their technical skills to develop and realize their creative projects. Potential topics covered include video and animation, digital image production, sound art, performance art, and movement

class: PMA 2800
class title: Introduction to Acting
description: An introduction to the actor's technique and performance skills, exploring the elements necessary to begin training as an actor, i.e., observation, concentration, and imagination. Focus is on physical and vocal exercises, improvisation, and text and character. There is required play reading, play attendance, and some scene study.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3000
class title: Independent Study
description: Independent study allows students the opportunity to pursue special interests not treated in regularly scheduled courses. A faculty member, who becomes the student's instructor for the course, must approve the student's program of study and agree to provide continuing supervision of the work.

class: PMA 3010
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: PMA 3226
class title: Global Dance and Decolonizing Movement
description: How does the social production of dance reflect its historical context? Is dance inherently political? What is the meaning of the "beautiful" in dance? Beginning with 16th century court dances, we will explore how aesthetics have been aligned both with and against politics in various periods, across borders, and genres of the performing body, looking at dance as insider's diplomacy and outsider's rebellion. Is modern dance a democratization of the art form? Is postmodern dance a discourse of traditions? This course is designed to promote a critical appreciation of dance, its values and its ambitions, by developing a historical and cultural understanding.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3241
class title: Site-Specific to Immersive Dance Theater: Choreography for Unconventional Formats and Spaces
description: Site-Specific to Immersive Dance Theater: Choreographing for Unconventional Formats and Spaces is a research-to-practice course reconsidering the function, philosophy, and reality of an evolving stage. What is the practice and purpose of performance beyond the traditional proscenium? How does the meaning of choreography operate and expand as its format alters and transforms? How does the performer properly exercise and prepare themselves to address their work in new and different surroundings? Audiences? Students will confront and respond to the psychological, political, historical, and communal orientation and potential of dance in non-traditional spaces. Using exercises based on reactive versus relational movement, students will distinguish between the making of site-sympathetic, site-specific, site-adaptable, environmental, installation, interactive, interventional, and immersive modes of dance performance, production, and world-making
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3463
class title: Contemporary Television
description: This course considers issues, approaches, and complexities in the contemporary television landscape. As television has changed drastically over the past fifteen years, this course provides students with a deeper understanding of the changes in narratives, technologies, forms, and platforms that structure/restructure the televisual world. Students will grapple with how "new media" forms such as web-series and on-demand internet streaming services have changed primetime television. We will balance our look at television shows with nuanced readings about the televisual media industry. By watching, analyzing, and critiquing the powerful medium of television, students will situate their understanding within a broader consideration of the medium's regulation, production, distribution, and reception in the network and post-network era.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3464
class title: Representational Ethics in Film and Television
description: This course is designed to explore the varied ways that race and gender intersect with the media industry. While common industrial logic suggests these descriptors of identity are not a factor in terms of its business models and assumptions, the reality is much more complex. Race, as well as gender, class, and sexuality, play large parts in how media industries function and in informing and shaping audience expectations and assumptions. Thus, the time spent in class will largely consist of deconstructing several media industries, including film, television, and new media to show just how race, as well as other modes of identity such as gender, sexuality, and class, operate within it. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3510
class title: Documentary Production Fundamentals
description: This introductory course familiarizes students with documentary filmmaking and audiovisual modes of knowledge production. Through lectures, screenings, workshops, and labs, students will develop single-camera digital video production and editing skills. Weekly camera, sound, and editing exercises will enhance students' documentary filmmaking techniques and their reflexive engagement with sensory scholarship. Additionally, students will be introduced to nonfiction film theory from the perspective of production and learn to critically engage and comment on each other's work. Discussions of debates around visual ethnography, the politics of representation, and filmmaking ethics will help students address practical storytelling dilemmas. Over the course of the semester, students conduct pre-production research and develop visual storytelling skills as they build a portfolio of short video assignments in preparation for continued training in documentary production.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3515
class title: Video and New Media: Art, Theory, Politics
description: The course will offer an overview of video art, alternative documentary video, and digital installation and networked art. It will analyze four phases of video and new media: (1) the development of video from its earliest turn away from television; (2) video's relation to art and installation; (3) video's migration into digital art; (4) the relation of video and new media to visual theory and social movements. Screenings will include early political and feminist video (Ant Farm, Rosler, Paper Tiger TV, Jones), conceptual video of the '80s and '90s (Vasulka, Lucier, Viola, Hill), gay and multicultural video of the '90s (Muntadas, Riggs, Piper, Fung, Parmar), networked and activist new media of the 21st century (Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, SubRosa, Preemptive Media). Secondary theoretical readings on postmodernism, video theory, multicultural theory, and digital culture will provide students with a cultural and political context for the discussion of video and new media style, dissemination, and reception.

class: PMA 3535
class title: TV Writing: Hour Long
description: This is a one-semester workshop focusing on the foundational basics of writing for television, with an emphasis on the structure and process of creating a hour long script. Students will individually pitch and break an original episode, and develop an outline, first draft script and rewrite for an existing and currently running  hour long television series. Additionally, all participants will work as a "writers' room" to give feedback and pitches on other students' projects. Students will have their work-in-progress read, analyzed, and discussed by all participants.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3550
class title: Global Cinema and Media
description: Global Cinema and Media offers a survey of international film and media history from the late nineteenth century to today. Through a focus on key films and significant epochs, the course traces the evolution of form, style and genre, the medium's changing technologies and business models, as well as film and media's relation to broader cultural, social and political contexts. Screenings of narrative, documentary and experimental films and video will be accompanied by readings in film and media theory and history.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3555
class title: Comics as a Medium
description: What are comics? While it's easy to identify a cartoon, graphic novel, or comic book, it's hard to understand the wide world of comics. As a medium, comics are part of a global tradition of visual storytelling and sequential art, including premodern tapestries, early modern pamphlets, and modern children's books, political cartoons, and animated films. With a focus on the German-speaking world, we will examine a wide range of comics genres (e.g., fiction, history, autobiography, journalism, comix) and formats (e.g., books, strips, pamphlets, zines). Our discussions will address questions of taste, aesthetics, materiality, censorship, representation, and word-image relations. While we will primarily be reading and writing about comics and comics studies, students will also gain some exposure to making comics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3570
class title: Film and Video Production I
description: An introduction to filmmaking, students will learn to create compelling characters, as well as develop strong storytelling skills through basic character and story development and breakdown, cinematography, lighting, sound and editing. Over the course of the semester, students will deconstruct and analyze visual culture in an effort to learn effective techniques in visual storytelling. Students will write, shoot and edit a series of dramatic narrative exercises, participating in the preproduction to post production processes. Students will collaborate and rotate through various roles. The course will culminate with the screening of the various course projects, in a public, open-campus event at the end of the semester. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3571
class title: Documentary Filmmaking
description: Documentary Filmmaking will equip. students with the knowledge to produce quality short, socially and culturally conscious, documentaries that express an interesting story. This course covers the aesthetic and technical fundamentals of directing and producing documentaries. It provides working tools to plan and tell your stories creatively, collaboratively, artistically and professionally. The goal is to produce quality productions designed as a stepping stone to more advanced projects. In the process, we will deeply discuss the principles, history, and ethics of documentary filmmaking.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3580
class title: Cinematography and Visual Storytelling
description: Film is a language that expresses the director's idea and cinematography is a key component of the language of film. You need to develop visual storytelling skills by blending lights, camera movements, frame composition, and color palette to use this film language to convey your idea. In this class we will learn the concept of visual strategies in filmmaking and cameras and lighting and research the various aspects of film cinematography.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3610
class title: Creative Apprenticeship
description: Based on previous coursework and experience, students may be offered the opportunity to participate as an apprentice in a mentored PMA creative project.  The apprentice experience and number of credits will be defined by the needs of the project, the area of study, and the mentor.  Apprentice roles may include Assistant Director, Assistant Designer, Assistant Choreographer, Dramaturg, or others, as determined by the mentor.  Successful completion of this course is necessary for application to the AUPR program.

class: PMA 3614
class title: Creative Character Design
description: A course working on the creation and development of characters on paper. The character designs explored will not be bound by the limits of the human body or physical costumes, but rather will push the limits of character imagery to that which could ultimately be achieved in print illustration, sequential art, traditional animation, digital special effects and animation, video gaming, various forms of puppetry and animatronic forms, depending on the student's area of interest. (Students will not engage in animation, or three-dimensional crafting of characters, but rather will develop the design content that could then be applied to these forms).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3630
class title: Scenic and Lighting Design for Performance Studio I
description: The Scenic and Lighting designers are responsible for creating 'the visual world' of the play. From sketches to models, from groundplans to light plots, this intro-level hands-on, project-based course introduces students to the scenic and lighting design processes through text analysis, visual research, beginning drafting practices, model building, light laboratories and beyond. Intended to provide a foundation in scenic and lighting design practices, the teachings of this course will have future applications in all performance disciplines including Theatre, Dance, Film, and Television.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3633
class title: Out of Body Performance: Puppets and Animation
description: From the ancient Javanese traditions of Wayang to the Muppets; from Emile Cohl to Pixar: Puppeteers and Animators are performer designers. In this course students will explore and discover the global canvas and world history of puppetry, animation, and their respective intersections through a combination of lectures, practice and research culminating in a final narrative project.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3661
class title: Costume Design Studio II
description: This course will explore unconventional costume designs for theatre, dance, and mediated performance.  It will deal with the special considerations found in some plays and performance pieces, such as the theatricalization of non-human subjects (animals, plants, elements, magical creatures, etc.), the visualization of music, or the support or enhancement of movement. It will cover alternative ways to create character through costume, make-up, masks, and wearable forms of puppetry.  Students will be responsible for script reading, character analysis, written "concepts", visual research, and rendering of design sketches for three projects, as well as other exercises.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: PMA 3660.

class: PMA 3680
class title: Sound Design
description: Covering the basics of digital audio, bioacoustics, psychoacoustics and sound design, as they apply to theatre, film and music production. Students create soundscapes for text and moving image using ProTools software.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: some experience with audio/video recording or editing.

class: PMA 3711
class title: Sitcom Jews: Ethnic Representation on Television, 1948-Present
description: Jews have been on TV since the beginning of the medium – over 70 years – and have made decisions about how they are represented. What kind of Jews do we put on screen, and do they actually represent Jews in America? What about the representation of other ethnic and cultural groups? What can we learn from the history of Jewish television that might apply to Black, Latinx, Muslim, LGBTQ, Asian and other communities as they present themselves to the American public? "Sitcom Jews" uses media analysis, theoretical discussion, and student writing to examine a huge range of TV, starting with classic sitcoms ("The Goldbergs" (1948), "All in the Family, and "Bridget Loves Bernie"), continuing through current Jewish TV shows ("Broad City", "Transparent", "Curb Your Enthusiasm"), and adding a range of ethnic television ("The Jeffersons", "Black-ish", "Insecure", "Ramy", "Will &amp; Grace", "Never Have I Ever").
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3740
class title: Parody
description: In A Theory of Parody, Linda Hutcheon defines parody broadly as "repetition with critical difference, which marks difference rather than similarity." Taking a cue from Hutcheon, we will consider parody as a form of meaning making that is not necessarily used in the service of ridicule. Rather, we will examine a number of late-twentieth- and early-twenty-first-century imitative works in order to distinguish the rich variety of political agendas and aesthetic rationales for recent parody. An emphasis on postmodern or contemporary performances and media that renovate images, ideas, and icons from modernism and modernity will unite our otherwise diverse efforts. Some of these efforts will also highlight what happens when an artist takes up a work made for one platform (for example, theatre, performance art, installation, cinema, television, the Web) and parodies it in another. Creators and works under consideration may range from Christopher Durang, Split Britches, and Pig Iron Theatre Company to The Simpsons, Cookie's Fortune, and Strindberg and Helium.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3750
class title: Global Theatre and Performance
description: This course is designed to introduce students to a range of historical, cross-cultural, and transnational performance texts, theories, and practices; to motivate students to examine the broad social, political, cultural, and economic contexts in which performances take place; and to familiarize students with major methodologies and paradigms for the creation, spectatorship, and interpretation of performances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3757
class title: American Drama and Theatre
description: Explores major American playwrights from 1900 to 1960, introducing students to American theatre as a significant part of modern American cultural history. We will consider the ways in which theatre has contributed to the construction and deconstruction of a national identity. Similarly, we will examine the influence of the American Theatre on and in film. We will pay special attention to the social, political, and aesthetic contexts of the time period and discuss the shifting popularity of dramatic forms, including melodrama, realism, expressionism, absurdism, and the folk play, in the American theatre canon. Authors include O'Neill, Glaspell, Odets, Rice, Hellman, Hughes, Miller, Williams, and Albee, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3800
class title: Acting II
description: Practical exploration of the actor's craft through exercises in physical and psychological action, improvisation and scene study.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PMA 2800 and audition.

class: PMA 3804
class title: Black Sound and Visual Culture
description: In this interdisciplinary seminar, we will study the strategies that sound artists, composers, visual artists, writers, and filmmakers have employed to use Black sounds as a sign. We will explore intersections between sound and image throughout the African diaspora. Intersections in question include the place of sound art within different Black musical and visual traditions, Black music as a resource for painting and sculpture, the visual design of Black music projects, the Black soundscape and the built environment, acoustic ecology and mapping in Black communities, and African diasporic filmmaking as a sonic art form.
outcome: Students will be able to articulate the arguments artists and cultural critics have made for and against the terms "Black sound" and "Black music"., Students will gain familiarity through exhibitions, screenings, and readings with the role Black sound and music have played in the visual arts and culture., Students will be able to identify some important concepts and techniques related to creative works made at the intersection of sound and image production throughout the African Diaspora., Students will have direct engagement with visual and sound artists whose work engages the material or idea of Black sound/music., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 3841
class title: Immersive Performance: Investigating the Experiential
description: The course traces the history and innovation of the Immersive Theatre Movement. These 21st century projects eliminate "the stage" as the primary location for performance to prioritize more experiential interactive audience engagements- with live-ness and active participation as fundamental goals. Working as collaborative think tank, students will engage, explore and specify examples set by artists such as Kara Walker, RA Walden, Coco Fusco and Marina Abramovics and Tania El Khoury evoking and expanding the definitions of experiential. They will examine the work of companies such as PIEHOLE, PUNCHDRUNK (SLEEP NO MORE), THIRD RAIL PROJECTS (THEN SHE FELL) and EN GARDE ARTS, SPEAKEASY DOLLHOUSE companies seeking to re-create the relationship between performer and spectator focusing on sensory engagement, visceral engagement and accessible spectacle  a variety of approach to stimulate and reawaken performativity - expanding theatre towards  multimedia applications, AR/VR and also solo interactive and site specific processes intended to surprise startle and instigate.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PMA 2100 or PMA 2800 or PMA 3750 or Design Studio.

class: PMA 3880
class title: Fundamentals of Directing I
description: Focused, practical exercises teach the student fundamental staging techniques that bring written text to theatrical life. A core objective is to increase the student's awareness of why and how certain stage events communicate effectively to an audience. Each student directs a number of exercises as well as a short scene.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 4000
class title: Senior Studio
description: In this advanced undergraduate-level seminar, all senior majors synthesize four years of study in a collaborative intellectual and artistic project with the faculty. Over the course of the fall semester, students conceive and produce work for presentation to the public in the Schwartz Center for the Performing Arts. Students also generate a supporting scholarly matrix for that work, and their collective genesis of material integrates the major's four rubrics (history, theory, and criticism; creative authorship; design; and embodied performance). As a crucible for artistic and intellectual collaboration, the senior studio may emphasize an area of study, a period, a text, or a theme. The studio's organizing emphasis will be specific to ongoing, pressing inquiries in the disciplines of performing and media arts.

class: PMA 4461
class title: Genres, Platforms, Media
description: How do questions of genre persist and evolve in the age of digital media and A.I.? To what extent do we choose our genres, and in what ways do they choose us? How do genres, platforms, and media intersect and inform one another? What hierarchies do they establish, and to what purposes? Moving among a range of genres and sub-genres, poetry, fiction, film, and multimedia, websites and streaming services, this course will explore the accelerating interplay of genres, platforms, and media, and the increasingly pervasive role of A.I., in contemporary culture and politics.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: PMA 4670
class title: Shakespeare's Hamlet: The Seminar
description: The most studied and written about work in Western Literature outside the Bible, Hamlet according to Harold Bloom, is our secular savior and our ambassador to death. This course centers on a close reading of the play. Through research and assigned readings the course tests theoretical viewpoints about the play against the text itself by reading the theory in relationship to the production history.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PMA 3750 or equivalent.

class: PMA 4671
class title: Funny Business: Stand Up Comedy and Its Social, Political, and Cultural Importance
description: This course will explore the cultural, political and social ramifications of stand-up comedy through the lens of twentieth and twenty-first century stand up comedians. Because of streaming services, Stand Up is more accessible than ever to a wider audience. Too, streamed video is not subject to the censorship rules of broadcast television so the wider array of subject matter and the way that subject can be presented is direct and fearless, making comics not just entertainers, but cultural influencers in a much broader way that earlier cultural critics, such as Lenny Bruce and Moms Mabley could only imagine. This newfound influence makes Stand Up comedians and their comedy ripe for study, not only within a cultural context but also as a part of free-speech arguments.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 4695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 4801
class title: Advanced Studies in Acting Techniques
description: Advanced acting students will expand their skills using targeted approaches and methodologies of the instructors' choosing to develop scripted and/or original material for in-class study and presentation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two Embodied Performance PMA classes.

class: PMA 4835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: PMA 4950
class title: Honors Research Tutorial I
description: First of a two-semester sequence (the second is PMA 4951) for seniors engaged in an honors project. Honor guidelines and form.

class: PMA 4951
class title: Honors Research Tutorial II
description: Second of a two-semester sequence (the first is PMA 4950) for students engaged in an honors project.

class: PMA 4952
class title: Undergraduate Internship
description: Academic credit can only be awarded for unpaid internships. Students must submit an Application for Academic Credit by April 15. The Application for Academic Credit must be received/approved prior to the start of the internship. If the internship opportunity is deemed eligible for academic credit, the student pursues the internship during the summer months and enrolls in this course the fall semester immediately following the summer internship. A written evaluation of the internship experience is required. Find complete information and application forms on the department website.

class: PMA 5804
class title: Black Sound and Visual Culture
description: In this interdisciplinary seminar, we will study the strategies that sound artists, composers, visual artists, writers, and filmmakers have employed to use Black sounds as a sign. We will explore intersections between sound and image throughout the African diaspora. Intersections in question include the place of sound art within different Black musical and visual traditions, Black music as a resource for painting and sculpture, the visual design of Black music projects, the Black soundscape and the built environment, acoustic ecology and mapping in Black communities, and African diasporic filmmaking as a sonic art form.  
outcome: Students will be able to articulate the arguments artists and cultural critics have made for and against the terms "Black sound" and "Black music"., Students will gain familiarity through exhibitions, screenings, and readings with the role Black sound and music have played in the visual arts and culture., Students will be able to identify some important concepts and techniques related to creative works made at the intersection of sound and image production throughout the African Diaspora., Students will have direct engagement with visual and sound artists whose work engages the material or idea of Black sound/music., 

class: PMA 6010
class title: Latinx Theatre Production
description: In this course, we will develop a toolbox of performance techniques based on methods developed in the Spanish-speaking and Latinx contexts. These techniques will be used in preparing short, original, collectively-created or scripted plays for production and public presentation in the October 2024 regional microtheater festival in upstate New York and/or the annual downtown Ithaca holiday pastorela in December.

class: PMA 6021
class title: Research Methods in PMA
description: This class is designed to introduce doctoral students to Humanistic Research Methods. While qualitative and quantitative research methods are humanistic, this course serves as an added layer of context that integrates the rationales for why these methods aid us as researchers in thinking about structures, power, and identity. In this sense, the humanistic research methods explored in this class are designed to generate thinking about those topics as it relates to both ourselves as individuals and the societal communities we are a part of.

class: PMA 6445
class title: German Media Theories
description: This seminar examines German media theories from the Frankfurt School to the Kittler Network and beyond. We will discuss influential concepts associated with this work (e.g., the culture industry, the public sphere, discourse networks), along with related concepts in media and cultural studies (e.g., space and time, analog and digital, old and new media). Theoretical readings address questions about media aesthetics, intermediality, and media change; automation, mechanization, and standardization; and communication, command, and control. Engaging with scholarly debates about interdisciplinarity and theory transfer, we will also revisit and revise reductive stereotypes about media critique, technological determinism, and the "Germanness" of German media theories.

class: PMA 6461
class title: Genres, Platforms, Media
description: How do questions of genre persist and evolve in the age of digital media and A.I.? To what extent do we choose our genres, and in what ways do they choose us? How do genres, platforms, and media intersect and inform one another? What hierarchies do they establish, and to what purposes? Moving among a range of genres and sub-genres, poetry, fiction, film, and multimedia, websites and streaming services, this course will explore the accelerating interplay of genres, platforms, and media, and the increasingly pervasive role of A.I., in contemporary culture and politics.

class: PMA 6510
class title: Documentary Production Fundamentals
description: This introductory course familiarizes students with documentary filmmaking and audiovisual modes of knowledge production. Through lectures, screenings, workshops, and labs, students will develop single-camera digital video production and editing skills. Weekly camera, sound, and editing exercises will enhance students' documentary filmmaking techniques and their reflexive engagement with sensory scholarship. Additionally, students will be introduced to nonfiction film theory from the perspective of production and learn to critically engage and comment on each other's work. Discussions of debates around visual ethnography, the politics of representation, and filmmaking ethics will help students address practical storytelling dilemmas. Over the course of the semester, students conduct pre-production research and develop visual storytelling skills as they build a portfolio of short video assignments in preparation for continued training in documentary production.

class: PMA 6550
class title: Global Cinema I
description: Global Cinema and Media offers a survey of international film and media history from the late nineteenth century to today. Through a focus on key films and significant epochs, the course traces the evolution of form, style and genre, the medium's changing technologies and business models, as well as film and media's relation to broader cultural, social and political contexts. Screenings of narrative, documentary and experimental films and video will be accompanied by readings in film and media theory and history.
 

class: PMA 6600
class title: Proseminar in Performing and Media Arts
description: An introduction to the theory and methods involved in the study of performing and media arts. Attention focuses on pedagogy and the profession in Part I. Part II explores current scholarly trends.

class: PMA 6695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).

class: PMA 6835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.

class: PMA 7000
class title: Independent Study for Graduate Students in Performing and Media Arts
description: Independent study in performing and media arts allows graduate students the opportunity to pursue special interests not treated in regularly scheduled courses. A faculty member, who becomes the student's instructor for the course, must approve the student's program of study and agree to provide continuing supervision of the work.

class: PMA 7100
class title: The Pedagogy of Performing and Media Arts
description: Provides graduate students in the field of Performing and Media Arts an opportunity to work directly with a faculty member to explore pedagogical theory and practice in undergraduate theatre classes in all areas of the curriculum.

class: PMA 9900
class title: Thesis and Research Projects
description: Graduate student course while working on thesis and research for dissertation.

class: POLSH 1131
class title: Elementary Polish I
description: In this course, students will work on their four language skills: listing, speaking, reading, and writing as well as cultural competence. We will focus on practical communication. The instructor uses communicative language teaching (CLT) with an emphasis on structured input.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: POLSH 2033
class title: Intermediate Polish I
description: In this course, students continue working on their ability to speak, write, read, and understand contemporary Polish.  Students will also enhance their intercultural competency.  The instructor uses communicative language teaching with emphasis on structured input.  Students use the textbook and workbook "Hurra!  Po polsku 2" supplemented by Polish-English chapter dictionaries.  This class covers chapters 1-10.  If a student is not sure of his or her language level, he or she can contact the Polish instructor, Ewa Bachminska, at eb583@cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: POLSH 1132.

class: PORT 1210
class title: Elementary Portuguese I
description: This course introduces students with no knowledge of Portuguese and with limited or no knowledge of Spanish to the Lusophone (Portuguese speaking) world.  Emphasis is given to the development of language skills (e.g., speaking, listening, reading, and writing), as well as the appreciation and awareness of Global Portuguese-speaking cultures, prompting students to make comparisons to their own culture.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: PORT 2010
class title: Intermediate Portuguese for Spanish Speakers I
description: This is an intensive introductory course for those who are native/near native speakers of Spanish.  Emphasis will be given in the development of the four skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing), as well as the appreciation and awareness of Portuguese-speaking cultures.  Students will engage with a broad range of topics related to Afro-Luso-Brazilian culture through art (e.g., painting, theater, cinema, literature, photography, dance sculpture, etc).
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PORT 1220.

class: PSYCH 1101
class title: Introduction to Psychology
description: Why are people superstitious? Why do people blush when they are embarrassed? What is intelligence (and are IQ tests a good way to measure it)? Why don't psychopaths feel guilty when they harm others? How reliable are childhood memories? Why do we laugh? Do violent video games make people act violently? Why do some people seem instantly trustworthy and others seem "creepy"? How do we choose whom to sleep with, date, or marry? How does stress affect our body? While questions like these have been asked for centuries, psychology has begun to provide answers to these - and other questions about the human mind - by applying the tools of scientific investigation. In this course you will receive a broad introduction to the science of psychology: from the history of the field and its major advances, to the latest research on topics such as perception, memory, intelligence, morality, sexuality, mental illness, religion, language, and creativity. You will also learn about the tools and methods psychologists use to investigate the mind, such as observing how the mind of a child changes and develops over time, looking at people across cultures, measuring brain activity, and experimentally manipulating everything from the shape of a figure presented on a computer screen, to the smell of a room, or the attractiveness of the experimenter.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 1102
class title: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This course provides an introduction to the science of the mind. Everyone knows what it's like to think and perceive, but this subjective experience provides little insight into how minds emerge from physical entities like brains. To address this issue, cognitive science integrates work from at least five disciplines: Psychology, Neuroscience, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Philosophy. This course introduces students to the insights these disciplines offer into the workings of the mind by exploring visual perception, attention, memory, learning, problem solving, language, and consciousness. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PSYCH 1104
class title: WIM: Introduction to Cognitive Science
description: This section is highly recommended for students who are interested in learning about the topics covered in the main course through writing and discussion. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: PSYCH 1102.

class: PSYCH 1120
class title: FWS:Personality & Social Psychology

class: PSYCH 1130
class title: FWS:Behavioral Evolution Psych
description: Behavioral &amp; Evolutionary Neuroscience Psychology seeks to understand behavior and cognition through investigations of the integrated roles of evolution, development, and mechanisms. The emphasis is on naturalistic behaviors of animals and ecologically relevant behaviors of humans. Comparative perspectives are well represented, the full range of development, including aging, is investigated, and both social and non-social behaviors are explained. Core questions are, what are the mechanisms (brain, sensory, endocrine, and behavioral) that enable animals (including humans) to behave appropriately? How do these mechanisms work? How do they develop? How did they evolve?

class: PSYCH 1131
class title: Introduction to Human Development
description: Introduction to Human Development provides a broad and foundational overview of field of human development, starting from conception and ending through process of death and dying. The course will start with an outline and explanation of the lifespan perspective in human development. The biological beginnings of life and prenatal development will serve as the start of the discussion of human development, followed by an exploration of physical, cognitive, and socioemotional development at each subsequent stage within the lifespan (e.g., infancy, early childhood, middle &amp; late childhood, etc.). Discussion of each developmental stage will highlight major research findings and their real-world application.
outcome: Develop a broad but strong base of knowledge surrounding the field of human development and how human development research is conducted., Be able to read and understand, critically think about current research in the field of human development and how research can be applied to the real world., Gain an understanding about the different developmental stages and what kind of change is occurring across the domains of physical, cognitive, and socioemotional development., Consider your beliefs about development before the course and reconsider the beliefs that are not supported by research., Find this class fun and interesting, taking what you learned from the course and be able to apply it in your daily life., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 1140
class title: FWS: Perception, Cognition, and Development
description: How do we perceive, learn about, and store information about the environments around us? How does what we have learned affect how we perceive and understand? PCD researchers in the graduate field of psychology at Cornell study human perception, language, and memory, as well as the development of various cognitive functions in infants. The methods they use are diverse, and range from human behavioral experiments in development, perception, and psycholinguistics, through computational modeling and simulation of auditory, visual, and language processes, to human electrophysiology by means of event-related potential (ERP) analysis.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: PSYCH 1500
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology
description: Environmental Psychology is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams.
outcome: Provide overview of knowledge about the environment and human behavior (grounding in field)., Understand cultural and life course diversity in human-environment interactions (sensitivity to diversity)., Learn how to analyze problems like an environmental psychologist (develop critical thinking skill)., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 1501
class title: Introduction to Environmental Psychology - Writing in the Major
description: Human-Environment Relations is an interdisciplinary field concerned with how the physical environment and human behavior interrelate. Most of the course focuses on how residential environments and urban and natural settings affect human health and well-being. Students also examine how human attitudes and behaviors affect environmental quality. Issues of environmental justice and culture are included throughout. Hands-on projects plus exams. Lecture and discussion sections. WIM section attends a regular lecture but also meets weekly with a graduate writing instructor. The two principal objectives of WIM section:
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 2230
class title: Intro to Behavioral Neuroscience
description: Introduction to psychology from a biological perspective, which focuses on brain mechanisms of behavior. Topics include the structure and function of the nervous system, physiological approaches to understanding behavior, hormones and behavior, biological bases of sensation and perception, learning and memory, cognition, emotion, and communication.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: PSYCH 2400
class title: Introduction to Community Psychology
description: What counts as a community? How do communities shape who we are? How can we engage in action to transform the communities we are a part of? These questions guide our inquiry in this introductory community psychology course. Community psychology examines the interrelationship between individual wellbeing and the multiple social structures and contexts with which individuals interact. Community psychologists are united by a shared commitment to understanding individuals using a multidisciplinary perspective, including developmental psychology, education, and sociology. Beyond seeking to understand, community psychologists also emphasize values, applied and participatory research, and action to promote the well-being of entire communities from a strengths-based perspective. This lecture-based course will provide an overview of theory, research, and action in community psychology. We will focus on (a) essential community psychology theories, (b) methodological strategies for studying alongside communities, and (c) practical applications related to understanding social and environmental contexts as essential components of the human experience. Throughout the course, we will discuss the role of communities in shaping our understandings of diversity, equity, and social justice. 
 
outcome: Be able to explain the historical foundations of the field of community psychology., Identify the epistemologies (ways of knowing) and principles that undergird community psychology., Be able to read and critically think about current research in community psychology., Critically assess how social and environmental contexts (e.g., families, media, communities) impact individuals' development and wellness. Apply contemporary theories and research to everyday experiences and life., Begin to consider your role as a change agent in transforming societal inequity., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 2450
class title: Pursuing Happiness
description: The Pursuit of Happiness is even mentioned in the Declaration of Independence, but what does this mean? This course will explore the kinds of happiness found in human experience, including financial success, public service, romantic and family life, political and cultural identity, as well as the power of music, literature, art and film to affect mood and self-awareness. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, ETM-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG, LA-AG)

class: PSYCH 2500
class title: Statistics and Research Design
description: In a complex environment with many sources of variability, how can one tell with confidence whether a particular observed effect is real? And how much confidence is appropriate? This course introduces the principles of statistical description and inference as strategies to answer these questions, with emphasis on methods of principal relevance to psychology, neuroscience, and the behavioral sciences.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 2580
class title: Six Pretty Good Books: Explorations in Social Science
description: This course is modeled after "Great Books" literature courses in the humanities, but with two important differences: we read non-fiction books in the social sciences rather than the humanities, written by highly prominent contemporary social scientists. The course title refers to the fact that the books are new, hence their potential greatness has yet to be confirmed by the test of time. We choose living authors to give students a unique opportunity: to interact with each of the six authors in Q&amp;A sessions via live or recorded video conferencing. 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 2750
class title: Introduction to Personality
description: What is "personality"? How is it scientifically studied and measured? To what extent, do biological, social, and cultural factors shape personality? Is personality an expression of our genetic make up and biology, the culmination of social influences, the interplay of both, or the result of random events? In this course, we will review the major theoretical paradigms of personality psychology, discuss contemporary research, theory, and methodology, and learn about key historical debates in the study of "personality".
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: introductory psychology or human development course.

class: PSYCH 2830
class title: Research Methods in Human Development
description: This course will introduce students to the basics of research design and will review several methodologies in the study of human development. The focus of the course will be on descriptive and experimental methods. Students will learn the advantages and challenges to different methodological approaches. The course also places an emphasis on developing students' scientific writing and strengthening their understanding of statistics.
outcome: The goals of the course are to encourage students to think critically, learn how to design basic research studies, and to develop their writing skills., Students will demonstrate their knowledge of course content, including theories, in areas of developmental and cognitive psychology in legal contexts., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 1150.

class: PSYCH 2930
class title: Introduction to Data Science for Social Scientists
description: Intro to Data Science for Social Scientists using R.
outcome: Import data from various sources (existing datasets, web-scraping)., Use principles of tidy data management (transposing, data types, formatting)., Manipulate data to extract needed information., Visualize quantitative data using a large variety of design principles., Run simple classifiers on data for predictive purposes., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 3020
class title: Methods in Neuroscience
description: This course will expose students to a wide range of commonly used methods in neuroscience research (theory behind the method, common applications of the method, how data are collected and analyzed using the method, strengths and weaknesses of the method, etc.). The goal for students is that by the end of the course, they will be able to read and critically evaluate primary literature from many areas of neuroscience and to understand how the methods used in the study helped the researchers come to their conclusions. This course will explore methods including (but not necessarily limited to): microscopy, methods to visualize neuronal structure and function, electrophysiology, methods to measure neural activity, methods to measure and manipulate expression of genes/mRNA/protein, machine learning methods for behavioral analysis, and whole brain imaging methods in humans and non-human animals.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)

class: PSYCH 3130
class title: Language and Power
description: In this course, we will explore how language interacts with power: how does language reflect, shape, threaten and reinforce power relations in human society? From childhood through old age, language is an ever-present source of symbolic power. We use it to develop and express our identities, to position ourselves in hierarchies, and to establish group membership and exclusion throughout life. Language shapes ourselves, our families, our social lives, and our institutions. Understanding how people use language can provide a window into hidden aspects of both individuals and the social world.
outcome: To develop skills for thinking, speaking, and writing critically about social scientific questions., To apply these skills in analyzing the papers we discuss in class., To understand the role of language in the social world and its power structures., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 3135
class title: The Psychology of Good and Evil
description: Morality seems to be a universal feature of humananity. People across time, place and culture have a strong sense that certain things are right or wrong, that some people are good and some are evil. Where does this moral sense come from? Why do some people disagree so strongly about what is right and wrong? How did evolution shape this moral sense? How does it develop? Are there any universal aspects of moral psychology? The goals of this course are to offer an introduction to the psychological science behind what humans know as morality.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PSYCH 1101.

class: PSYCH 3190
class title: Memory and the Law
description: Focuses on how the scientific study of human memory interfaces with the theory and practice of law.
outcome: Students will demonstrate the presentation of clear and effective arguments in a written communication format., Students will demonstrate their ability to understand and apply course material in an objective manner., 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PSYCH 3240
class title: Behavioral Neuroscience Laboratory
description: This course is designed to provide an introduction to experimental research on the neural basis of behavior and cognition in animals. Topics will include basic neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, neural and hormonal control of behavior, and learning and memory. Students will gain extensive hands on experience with a variety of laboratory techniques, and animal species, and behaviors.
distribution categories: (BIO-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: PSYCH 2230 or BIONB 2220.

class: PSYCH 3300
class title: Introduction to Computational Neuroscience
description: Covers the basic ideas and techniques involved in computational neuroscience. Surveys diverse topics, including neural dynamics of small networks of cells, neural coding, learning in neural networks and in brain structures, memory models of the hippocampus, sensory coding, and others.
outcome: Basic understanding of current theories of brain function., How to construct representations from tuning curves., Plasticity and how it relates to memory., Models of human memory., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AS, SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIONB 2220 or permission of instructor.

class: PSYCH 3820
class title: Prejudice and Stereotyping
description: Social group membership - based on race and ethnicity, class, sexual orientation, sex, gender and gender identity, etc. and their intersection- can profoundly influence one's experience of the world and each other.  Through this course we will cover the basic experimental social psychology research on thoughts and beliefs (stereotypes), evaluative attitudes (prejudice), and behaviors (discrimination) that are based on group membership. We will explore how empirical research developed from primarily examining explicit (blatant) prejudice in the 20th century to recent examinations of implicit forms of stereotyping and prejudice. We will explore how stereotyping and prejudice can arise from basic perceptual and categorical processes, discuss strategies for minimizing expressed bias in interpersonal situations, and examine the experience of high status - and the consequences of losing it. The ultimate aim is to enhance your ability to evaluate and analyze the scientific merit of this research and apply it to real world social issues.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 4270
class title: Evolution of Language
description: Seminar surveying a cross-section of modern theories, methods, and research pertaining to the origin and evolution of language. Considers evidence from psychology, the cognitive neurosciences, theoretical biology, comparative psychology, and computational modeling of evolutionary processes. Topics for discussion may include: What is special about language? What can we learn from comparative perspectives on neurobiology and behavior? Can apes really learn language? Did language come about through natural selection or cultural evolution?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: any one course in psychology or human development.

class: PSYCH 4331
class title: Event Cognition: How Minds, Brains and Bodies Experience Events
description: People experience and remember complex and dynamic environments as events. This seminar draws on work from cognitive neuroscience to characterize how people shape experience into events, and how these processes support adaptive behavior. The course will start with discussions of historical and modern perspectives about the relationships between minds, bodies, and experience. We will then cover topics ranging from the perception of motion and causality to social learning and interaction. The primary goals are for you to be able to (1) read and evaluate research in psychology, cognitive science, and neuroscience, and (2) describe and understand the implications of this research for how minds and bodies are adapted to everyday situations.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a course in PSYCH, COGST, HD or NBB.

class: PSYCH 4420
class title: The Psychology and Ethics of 21st Century Technology
description: New technologies are changing our world at a rapid pace. In many cases, the society does not fully understand the impact of technology and is not prepared for the speed of the change that is occurring. This course will explore a few of these new technologies and investigate their effects on the users and on the society at large. The topics that will be explored include face recognition, virtual reality, violence in media, general AI, and the technological singularity. We will look at the ways in which these technologies affect our lives, with a focus on education, entertainment, employment, politics, and the future of humanity.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)

class: PSYCH 4430
class title: Confronting Climate Change
description: This course on the climate crisis acquaints students with the psychological factors underlying ecocide and anthropogenic climate change and the possible avenues for its mitigation, with a particular focus on climate justice and Indigenous knowledges and ways of relating to nature. In parallel with reading and discussing primary literature on these topics, students work on research projects, complementing theory with practice and placing it in the local geopolitical context.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 4510
class title: Research Seminar on the Relational Mind

class: PSYCH 4550
class title: The Psychology of Wisdom
description: This course will cover the psychology of wisdom.  Among the topics to be covered are the definition of wisdom, theories and models of wisdom, development of wisdom, measurement of wisdom, relations of wisdom to other characteristics, state versus trait characteristics of wisdom, teaching for wisdom, wisdom and leadership, wisdom and society.
outcome: Disciplinary knowledge., Apply multi-disciplinary perspectives., Think critically., Write, speak, and use visual communications effectively., Understand moral and ethical reasoning using wisdom., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 4580
class title: The Science of Social Behavior
description: This is a capstone seminar for seniors who are interested in graduate or professional study in scientific disciplines that focus on human behavior and social interaction. The intent is to provide seniors with an opportunity to summon, integrate, and apply insights that they have acquired over the course of their undergraduate education, and give prospective graduate students the opportunity to lead discussions in a large introductory lecture course, "Six Pretty Good Books". Each seminar member is part of a two or three-person team that leads the discussion together, under the supervision of a graduate teaching assistant. Seminar meetings are devoted to building lesson plans for leading an effective discussion of each of the six books. The authors vary from year to year but include Malcolm Gladwell, Michelle Alexander, Nate Silver, and Nicholas Christakis. All authors have agreed to participate in a "Q&amp;A" session with the students which seminar members are required to attend.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 2580 or ILRGL 2580 or PSYCH 2580 or SOC 2580.

class: PSYCH 4700
class title: Undergraduate Research in Psychology
description: Practice in planning, conducting, and reporting independent laboratory, field, and/or library research.

class: PSYCH 4710
class title: Advanced Undergraduate Research in Psychology
description: Advanced experience in planning, conducting, and reporting independent laboratory, field, and/or library research. One, and preferably two, semesters of PSYCH 4700 is required. The research should be more independent and/or involve more demanding technical skills than that carried out in PSYCH 4700.

class: PSYCH 4810
class title: Advanced Social Psychology
description: The focus of this course is on discussion and critical analysis of selected articles from very recent issues of the most selective social psychological journals.  Readings are chosen for their importance, their coverage of contemporary topics in social psychology, and their potential for generating stimulating discussion . Students write brief "thought papers" before each class in which they offer suggestions for class discussion based on their close reading of the day's assigned articles. They also write a term paper (details at first class meeting).
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: PSYCH 4860
class title: Special Topics in Social Psychology

class: PSYCH 5750
class title: Quantitative Methods I
description: This course is a rigorous introduction to graduate statistics for social sciences. We will briefly review descriptive statistics and probability theory. We will discuss fundamental inferential frameworks at length, with a focus on Frequentist and Bayesian statistics.  The remainder of the semester will be focused on the analysis of randomized studies.
outcome: You will gain proficiency in coding in R to achieve a variety of data-analytic tasks., You will be able understand different designs for randomized studies, including factorial designs., You will be able to apply appropriate inferential statistics, ranging from p-values, Bayes Factors, confidence intervals, and credible intervals., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: college level introductory statistics.

class: PSYCH 6000
class title: General Research Seminar
description: This course is designed to introduce first-year graduates to the Psychology Department faculty through a weekly series of presentations of current research.

class: PSYCH 6001
class title: Graduate Professionalism Seminar
description: This course enhances the graduate experience and prepares first-year psychology graduate students for success.  The student receives a formal introduction to conceptualizing and articulating a research project, science writing, the grant proposal and review processes, and numerous other aspects of professional development.  The course serves as an opportunity for preparation for graduate studies and a career in academics or a related profession.

class: PSYCH 6020
class title: Methods in Neuroscience
description: This course will expose students to a wide range of commonly used methods in neuroscience research (theory behind the method, common applications of the method, how data are collected and analyzed using the method, strengths and weaknesses of the method, etc.). The goal for students is that by the end of the course, they will be able to read and critically evaluate primary literature from many areas of neuroscience and to understand how the methods used in the study helped the researchers come to their conclusions. This course will explore methods including (but not necessarily limited to): microscopy, methods to visualize neuronal structure and function, electrophysiology, methods to neural activity, methods to measure and manipulate expression of genes/mRNA/protein, machine learning methods for behavioral analysis, and whole brain imaging methods in humans and non-human animals.

class: PSYCH 6225
class title: Special Topics in Social Psychology

class: PSYCH 6270
class title: Evolution of Language
description: Seminar surveying a cross-section of modern theories, methods, and research pertaining to the origin and evolution of language. Considers evidence from psychology, the cognitive neurosciences, theoretical biology, comparative psychology, and computational modeling of evolutionary processes. Topics for discussion may include: What is special about language? What can we learn from comparative perspectives on neurobiology and behavior? Can apes really learn language? Did language come about through natural selection or cultural evolution?

class: PSYCH 6271
class title: Topics in Biopsychology
description: Course explores current issues in Psychology.  Topics vary by section.

class: PSYCH 6331
class title: Event Cognition: How Minds, Brains and Bodies Experience Events

class: PSYCH 6510
class title: Research Seminar on the Relational Mind

class: PSYCH 6810
class title: Advanced Social Psychology
description: The focus of this course is on discussion and critical analysis of selected articles from very recent issues of the most selective social psychological journals. Readings are chosen for their importance, their coverage of contemporary topics in social psychology, and their potential for generating stimulating discussion. Students write brief "thought papers" before each class in which they offer suggestions for class discussion based on their close reading of the day's assigned articles. They also write a term paper on a social psychological topic of their own choosing.

class: PSYCH 6860
class title: Special Topics in Social Psychology

class: PSYCH 7000
class title: Research in Biopsychology
description: A graduate research seminar in biopsychology.

class: PSYCH 7100
class title: Research in Human Experimental Psychology
description: A graduate research seminar in human experimental psychology.

class: PSYCH 7200
class title: Research in Social Psychology and Personality
description: A graduate research seminar in social psychology and personality.

class: PSYCH 7750
class title: Proseminar in Social Psychology I
description: First semester of a year-long discussion-seminar course intended to give graduate students an in-depth understanding of current research and theory in social psychology. Emphasizes social cognition, but other topics, such as group dynamics, social influence, moral psychology, and emotional experience, are covered.

class: PSYCH 9000
class title: Doctoral Thesis Research in Biopsychology
description: A graduate seminar on doctoral thesis research in biopsychology.

class: PSYCH 9100
class title: Doctoral Thesis Research in Human Experimental Psychology
description: A graduate seminar on doctoral thesis research in human experimental psychology.

class: PSYCH 9200
class title: Doctoral Thesis Research in Social Psychology and Personality
description: A graduate seminar on doctoral thesis research in social psychology and personality.

class: PUBPOL 1111
class title: Building Success at Brooks
description: This course offers a jumpstart for Brooks School students majoring in Public Policy or Health Care Policy to facilitate in planning their college experience. The course will help students develop goals for their time as a Cornell Undergraduate, including how best to integrate curricular and extracurricular activities and begin exploring career options.
outcome: Describe how the mission and learning outcomes of the Cornell Jeb E. Brooks School of Public Policy and the Public Policy or Health Care Policy major relate to them and their undergraduate experience., Explore their goals for maximizing their undergraduate experience and success., Draft a four year plan including course planning and strategy for including desired experiences potentially including research, study abroad, internships and other growth experiences., 

class: PUBPOL 2040
class title: Economics of the Public Sector
description: The public sector now spends nearly two out of every five dollars generated as income in the U.S. economy. A thorough knowledge and understanding of this important sector is an essential part of training in policy analysis and management. This course provides an overview of the public sector of the U.S. economy, the major categories of public expenditures, and the main methods used to finance these expenditures. The principles of tax analysis and cost-benefit analysis are presented with a focus on the role of public policy in improving economic efficiency, promoting the goals of equity and social justice, and improving equity by altering the distribution of wealth and income.
outcome: Explain and identify conditions justifying government intervention in markets, and describe the theoretical impact of possible interventions using indifference curves, budget constraints, and supply and demand functions., Learn the framework for major US government programs, including social insurance and tax policy., Apply the theoretical tool of economic analysis to evaluate the substantive impact of existing US policies., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000.

class: PUBPOL 2101
class title: Statistics for Public Policy
description: "Introduction to Statistics for Public Policy" introduces basic statistical techniques used by researchers to investigate social, economic, and political phenomena. Topics include data presentation and descriptive statistics, measures of central tendency and dispersion, random variables and their probability distributions, joint and conditional distributions, expected value, conditional expectation, statistical sampling and inference, interval estimation and confidence intervals, hypothesis testing using t and F distributions, correlation, bivariate regression analysis, and statistical elaboration. A lab accompanies the course lectures. In problem sets and exams, students calculate statistics by hand to develop familiarity with data analysis. They also learn and apply basic commands using Stata statistical software.
outcome: Employ basic numeric and visualization tools to describe data., Apply inferential statistical analysis to policy-relevant research questions., Conduct statistical evaluations of US census data in computing environment., Critique methodological approaches to social scientific research., 
distribution categories: (MQR-HE) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: PUBPOL 2220
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 2250
class title: Social Problems in the United States
description: "Social Problems in the U.S." teaches students how to think like a social scientist when encountering claims about major contemporary issues. Through readings and assignments, students develop an analytical toolkit for evaluating the scope, causes, consequences, and proposed solutions to a wide range of complicated social problems, such as: childhood poverty, racial segregation and discrimination, job insecurity, family instability, discrimination by sexual identity, unequal pay for women's work, gender imbalances in family life, health disparities, food insecurity, drug abuse, and educational inequality. Rather than cover all of these (and other) social problems in depth, the course emphasizes a conceptual framework that can be applied broadly. The semester culminates with a written proposal examining a social problem and developing an approach to address it with public policy.
outcome: Develop a strategy for discussing controversial social issues with others who hold competing perspectives., Demonstrate an understanding of core concepts from Sociology and Policy Analysis as they relate to topics in education, health, and social welfare., Distinguish between normative, descriptive, and causal claims about social problems as they emerge in public debate., Evaluate the validity of claims about social problems by drawing on evidence from empirical research., Analyze trade-offs and unintended consequences implicated in the design and implementation of social policies., 
distribution categories: (CA-HE, D-HE, SBA-HE) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 2301
class title: Introduction to Public Policy
description: The pressing issues of our time—from climate change to national security, from immigration to policing, from global economic development to domestic voting rights—are deeply intertwined with public policy decisions made by governments. In this course, we consider how societal conditions come to be defined as problems for governments to solve, the role of public and private actors in influencing policy processes, and how we know whether policies achieve their goals. Course readings, lectures, discussions, and experiential learning assignments provide opportunities for students to critically analyze public policy processes and outcomes from multiple disciplinary perspectives, including economics, political science, and sociology. The course also introduces students to key areas of public policy including technology policy; environmental and sustainability policy; global security; health policy; inequality and social policy; international development; and race, racism and public policy.
outcome: Students will be able to describe the various political institutions that create public policy and how stakeholders engage such institutions to shape the policy process., Students will be able to evaluate methods of policy analysis that can be used to identify the effects of public policies., Students will be able to critically examine public policy issues from multiple disciplinary, normative, and cultural perspectives., Students will be able to communicate effectively and respectfully about public policy in written and oral formats., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 2370
class title: Race, Racism, and Public Policy
description: Public policy is a fundamental mechanism for addressing the most vexing and important social problems of our time. Racial inequality and structural racism are chief among such problems. Policy is thus widely understood and frequently touted as a means for redressing the harms of racism. Yet, public policy has also been identified as a channel through which racism flows. These seemingly paradoxical understandings of the relationships between racism and public policy raise critical questions about equality, democracy, the economy, and politics. This course examines such questions. questions. We begin by theoretically grounding key concepts such as "race" "racism" and "public policy." We then consider the historical record, highlighting the fundamental role of racism in shaping politics and policy. Next, we build on these conceptual and historical foundations through thematic investigation of core policy elements (e.g., policy design, policy implementation, policy feedback), key policy institutions (e.g., legislatures, parties) and significant policy actors (e.g., social movement organizations, interest groups). Finally, the class wraps up with a series of policy "deep dives" involving close examination of specific policy domains (e.g., housing, health, the enviornment). This course provides students with the knowledge and analytical tools necessary to better understand the realities and complexities of race, racism, and public policy in the United States.
outcome: Demonstrate significant knowledge about race, racism, and public policy., Apply such knowledge to the analysis of pressing social problems., Write about race and public policy with clarity and empirical grounding., Discuss intellectually rigorous content about contentious issues., 
distribution categories: (D-HE, SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3041
class title: U.S. Immigration Law and Policy
description: This course addresses the major themes and controversies in United States immigration law and policy, including: Constitutional limits on legislative and executive power; the role of administrative agencies and the federal courts; the role of state versus federal decision-makers; the admission and removal (deportation) of noncitizens; protections of asylum-seekers and refugees; illegal immigration; strategies of immigration law enforcement; immigration detention; due process rights in removal proceedings; and civil rights of noncitizens.  This course will also briefly address some key issues in alienage law and policy, including the rights of noncitizens (including noncitizens without immigration status) to education, work and public benefits.
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of the legal framework (Constitutional, statutory, regulatory, or relating to federal court and administrative agency case law) governing immigration policy in the U.S., Develop the legal reasoning tools necessary to analyze legal sources and make legal arguments – both orally and in writing – on behalf of (fictional) clients, including noncitizens and the Department of Homeland Security., Develop a strong understanding of how immigration law works in practice, with an emphasis on legal and empirical evaluation of the extent to which current practices comply (or fail to comply) with basic norms of due process., Develop a strong understanding of how immigration and alienage policy are created, given complex political and institutional factors driving statutory and administrative action at both the federal and state and local levels., Research, understand and analyze the most pressing and fundamental policy dilemmas and trade-offs in the field of immigration policy; learn to analyze empirical evaluations of immigration policies and use them to construct specific policy recommendations., 
distribution categories: (D-HE) (D-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: courses regarding the structure of the U.S. government and policy design courses are helpful but not required.

class: PUBPOL 3050
class title: Refugee Pathways and Resettlement Policy
description: In collaboration with refugee resettlement centers in New York State, this community-engaged course will explore: the global systems of inequality that produce forced migration; the politics of who "gets" to be a refugee; the uncertain pathways from conflict to internal displacement and/or non-permanent settlement; and the policies and process that inform refugee resettlement in Upstate New York. Students will work on collaborative projects with refugee-supporting organizations in Upstate NY and will be required to attend at least one course-organized site visit to a partner organization in either Syracuse or Utica.
outcome: Describe some of the major theoretical and practical conundrums and debates in refugee resettlement policy., Evaluate and critically respond to arguments made by leading migration policy scholars., Explain the primary actors, processes, and governance structures that dictate forced migration, non-permanent settlements and refugee resettlement in a variety of contexts., Compose high-quality work products that are relevant to the practice of refugee resettlement in Upstate New York., 

class: PUBPOL 3080
class title: Economics of the U.S. Social Safety Net
description: This course provides an overview of the major programs that make up the social safety net in the United States. We will review the economic rationale behind social programs, identify the economic consequences of these programs, and assess the empirical research on these topics. A major emphasis of the course will be on understanding the strengths and limitations of the core methodologies used in the existing economics literature.
outcome: Identify and explain the reasons for government redistribution and provision of social insurance., Describe the ways in which social programs are implemented in reality, and analyze the potential distortions and consequences of program design using economic reasoning., Evaluate the empirical evidence on the impact of social programs on individual behavior and well-being by applying knowledge of statistical methodology., Formulate and express well-reasoned arguments for or against specific policies through written and oral presentations., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (D-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 or equivalent and PUBPOL 3100 or equivalent.

class: PUBPOL 3120
class title: Research Design, Practice, and Policy
description: Examines systematic approaches for addressing questions about poverty, family life, racial inequality, and a range of other issues central to public policy. It emphasizes the logic and methods of social science research, including the measurement of social phenomena, generalizing results to groups of interest, establishing cause and effect, social experiments, survey research, and qualitative methods. It develops skills to critically evaluate the research of others and provides hands-on experience applying research methods to policy-related problems.
outcome: Discuss the possibilities and problems of studying the social world., Utilize and understand a variety of research methods, their strengths, and their limitations., Critically evaluate the research of others., Apply research methods to policy-related issues., Identify critical ethical issues in the responsible conduct of social research., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2100 or equivalent.

class: PUBPOL 3135
class title: World Food Systems and Public Policy
description: This course aims to teach students the basics of global food systems, their governance, and the public policies that shape them across the globe. An emphasis will be put on understanding the interconnections between the developed world and the global south in food consumption and production.
outcome: Develop an in-depth understanding of global food systems, focusing on the governance structures, geopolitical interdependencies between developed and developing nations, and their complex structural intricacies., Explore critical issues and global policies affecting food systems, analyzing case studies that impact consumer choices, world policies, and identifying sustainable solutions to global food security challenges., Understand the interconnections between society, ecology, and governance, and their broader implications for food governance, security, nutritional outcomes, and sustainability., Encourage and enable students to improve communication skills and develop creative and critical faculties through diverse course activities, such as reading, writing, and presenting elevator pitches, writing policy memos, while gaining a nuanced understanding of pressing issues in global food systems., 

class: PUBPOL 3140
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: PUBPOL 3151
class title: Gender Inequality and Global Policy
description: The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 states that countries should: "Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls" by 2030. What is empowerment and how will we know when it has been achieved? Why is gender inequality a problem for countries? In this course, we formulate answers to these questions through an examination of gender and development policy past and present. We unpack different and often competing definitions of 'empowerment' and 'gender equality' deployed in global policy, and understand the historical lineages of development theory and feminisms that led to 'gender' as an important policy consideration. Importantly, students build analytical tools for evaluating how intersectional experiences of gender shape the impact of these policies on the lives of women, girls, and other gender minorities.
outcome: Describe at least three distinct historical movements in gender and development policy and the various feminist theories connected to these movements., Discuss current approaches and major debates in women's 'empowerment' across key policy sectors including: economic growth, education, public health, and agriculture., Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of historical and contemporary gender policy cases for promoting gender equality., Assess SDG 5 as a policy framework for reducing gender inequality globally., Synthesize theoretical and empirical evidence into convincing and cohesive written analytical arguments., 

class: PUBPOL 3190
class title: Nonprofits and Public Policy
description: The Nonprofit sector plays an important role in society and makes up a growing share of the U.S. economy. In this course, we use economic theory and econometric tools to examine the nonprofit market and how it gets shaped by public policy. Topics covered include theories of the nonprofit market, determinants of charitable giving and volunteering, the role played by religion, competition between nonprofits and for-profits in labor markets, and the effects of taxes, subsidies and regulations.
outcome: Describe the main theories explaining the need for having a nonprofit sector., Evaluate whether nonprofits are suitable or needed in different industries., Apply and explain intuition behind economic models that describe the public and nonprofit sectors., Interpret econometric evidence and evaluate appropriateness of methods to address important question in the sector., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 or ECON 3030 or equivalent.

class: PUBPOL 3200
class title: International Human Rights
description: This course will address major challenges in international human rights law, policy, and practice. Specific topics include children's rights, women's rights, LGBTQI+ rights, the rights of refugees and migrants, the rights of people with disabilities, the rights of minorities and freedom from discrimination, freedom from torture, the right to life, the death penalty, modern slavery, and the right to sustainable development. We will also discuss the role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and corporations with respect to human rights, as well as the impact of actions (and inactions) by states and institutions in the "Global North" on the realization of human rights in states in the "Global South."
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of the legal framework and sources of law (treaties, customary international law, UN institutions and machinery) governing international human rights law and policy, as well as a strong introduction to the substance of many internationally recognized human rights., Build a strong foundation regarding the leading human rights challenges facing people around the world; explore how comparative policy analysis can be helpful in designing effective responses., Develop a keen understanding of how international human rights principles and mechanisms are created and how they work in practice, with an emphasis on political factors and empirical evaluation of the efficacy of various mechanisms., Develop the legal reasoning tools necessary to analyze U.S. legal sources (statutes, regulations, judicial and administrative opinions and guidance) as they relate to international human rights obligations of the U.S., Design a creative, compelling, and politically viable constitutional, legislative, or administrative solution to a pressing human rights challenge in a jurisdiction of your choosing, based on in-depth research and analysis of a particular human rights issue in a particular location., 
distribution categories: (D-HE) (D-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3230
class title: Public Policy for an Aging Society
description: This course is designed to introduce students to important theories, concepts, and empirical findings in the study of aging and policy, giving them a deeper understanding of the issues people encounter as they grow older. While the course will primarily cover current U.S. policies and trends, we will also discuss some historical aspects and compare to policies found elsewhere.
outcome: Describe key public programs and policies designed to assist older adults and their families., Explain how population aging intersects with public polices and related controversies about age-based policy., Understand how federal, state, and local policies address policy challenges of caring for an aging population., Evaluate the strengths, weaknesses, and trade-offs inherent in current age-based policy., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3270
class title: Constitutional Law: An Introduction
description: In this course, we will examine one of the most important documents in American history – our Constitution.  Course topics will include the historical background of the document from the Magna Carta to the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation.  We will look at the creation of the Constitution, including the conflict between strong supporters of this proposed new Constitution (Federalists) and their opponents (Anti-Federalists). How did the Founders resolve their differences and what led the States to adopt a document limiting and balancing the powers of the President, Congress, and the Judiciary? We shall look at the constant tension (from the beginning to the present) over the balance of power between the three co-equal branches.  We shall discuss the role of the Constitution from both empirical and theoretical perspectives and look at how it has evolved from 1788 to the present day. Special attention will be paid to the use of Amendments, particularly the Bill of Rights, to address events/circumstances unforeseen by the drafters.  Finally, the course will discuss critical cases where the Supreme Court defined and redefined what the Constitution meant.
outcome: Students will identify key stakeholders in the formulation of the Constitution., Students will identify and discuss key cases in controversy in which the Supreme Court ruled to establish clear parameters on how the Constitution has been interpreted for more than 200 years with an emphasis on the Bill of Rights., Students will analyze why the Constitution remains such an important aspect an influence in American daily life., (graduate students) Assess the scholarly understanding of the role of the Constitution and Constitutional Law in American politics and policy., 
distribution categories: (HA-HE) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3280
class title: Fundamentals of Population Health
description: Population health focuses on the health and well‐being of entire populations. Populations may be geographically defined, such as neighborhoods or counties; may be based on groups of individuals who share common characteristics such as age, race‐ethnicity, disease status, or socioeconomic status; or may be specific patient groups "attributed" to accountable healthcare organizations using a variety of methods. With roots in epidemiology, public health, and demography, key tools of population health include health measurement, risk stratification, chronic care management, identifying "upstream" social determinants of health, cross-sector collaboration to improve prevention and wellness, and increasing health equity. Given the shifting health care environment – from fee‐for‐service to value‐based care – students who are able to apply tools to measure analyze, evaluate, and improve the health of populations (and achieve the Triple Aim) will be well‐positioned for jobs in health care, health policy, public health, and medicine (among others) as the field continues to evolve.
outcome: Apply a population health and health equity perspective to problem solving., Calculate and use for decision‐making, key population health metrics and methods., Leverage publicly available social, place, demographic, and health data to analyze the health of a local community., Synthesize existing tools to design a population-tailored social determinants of health (SDH) screening tool., Analyze claims data to identify "high cost" patients and build tailored care teams to support patient needs., Build an Excel tool to identify patients at high risk for readmission following surgery and develop a tailored care transition plan designed to reduce readmissions., Recommend population health management practices (i.e., risk stratification, care coordination, complex care management, patient engagement, cross‐sector collaboration), population health delivery models (e.g., medical homes, telehealth), and payment models (e.g., capitation; Medicaid waivers), to achieve the Triple Aim., Consider different perspectives and demonstrate multicultural competence and inclusive communication while working in diverse groups or sharing in Discussion posts., Explain how structural racism contributes to observed health disparities and apply a health equity framework to class projects and discussions., Demonstrate flexibility, adaptability, and a growth mindset as we navigate a potentially shifting class environment., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: at least one of the following GDEV 2200, HD 1150, HD 1170, HD 2180, PUBPOL 2030, PUBPOL 2100, PUBPOL 2208, PUBPOL 2300, PUBPOL 2350, PSYCH 1101, SOC 1101.

class: PUBPOL 3320
class title: Mental Health Care Delivery and Policy
description: Mental illnesses are common in the United States. More than 1 in 5 adults (greater than 50 million people) live with a mental health illness and 1 in 5 youth (ages 13-18) will have experienced a seriously debilitating mental illness in their lifetime. Yet, less than half of those who need treatment receive it: Depression is the leading cause of disability, suicide is the 2nd leading cause of death among youth aged 10-14, and unmet mental health needs have profound long-term consequences including reductions in overall health and quality of life; substance use and addiction; family disruption; criminal justice system involvement; homelessness; unemployment and productivity losses; and early preventable mortality. This course provides an overview of the state of mental health in the United States with a focus on the drivers of mental well-being, mental illness, and mental health inequities. We will examine how mental health practice and policy can improve (or impede) community mental well-being, quality of mental health care, and mental health outcomes for those experiencing mental illness. Intentional focus will be given to topics such as stigma, historical trauma, and racism in addition to the importance of culturally intentional and patient-centered evidence-based care in order to collectively envision healthier and more equitable futures.
outcome: Define mental health and poor mental health including mental illness and disability., Describe the overall burden of mental illness in the US and its drivers, consequences, evidence-based treatment best practices, and historical and contemporary mental health policy., Working in pairs or trios, demonstrate the competencies described in #2 by co-authoring a 4-stage research project, including a 5-minute lightning talk, for an instructor-approved mental health issue and population of their choosing., Use Photovoice as a personal lens for critical reflection on historical and contemporary mental health structures and inequities to envision mentally healthier futures for all., Consider different perspectives and demonstrate multicultural competence and inclusive communication while working in diverse groups in class., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: PUBPOL 2350 and/or PUBPOL 3280.

class: PUBPOL 3400
class title: The Economics of Consumer Policy
description: Familiarizes students with the economic analysis of consumer policy issues. Uses the tools of microeconomic analysis to investigate the interaction between government and the marketplace, with an emphasis on how that interaction affects consumers. Examines the rationale for and effects of regulation of industry. Considers alternative theories of regulation, including the capture, economic, and public interest theories. Applies those theories to specific types of regulation, including economic regulation of specific industries (e.g., telecommunications, electricity, trucking, railroads, postal services) as well as to broader social regulation (e.g., health, safety, environmental). The effects of regulatory reform in numerous industries are also examined. An attempt is made to examine current topics relating to consumer policy.
outcome: Describe specific consumer protection regulations in place in a variety of markets; compare policies across markets and across government jurisdictions., Use concepts from information economics and behavioral economics to explain the rationale for specific types of consumer protection regulations., Analyze the predicted efficiency and distributional consequences of consumer protection regulations, using the tools of microeconomics., Use empirical evidence to critically analyze the performance of regulations., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: PUBPOL 3450
class title: Democracy Promotion in Modern U.S. Foreign Policy
description: Promotion and support of democracy is a well-established principle of U.S. foreign policy. However, even four decades after its insertion into Washington's approach overseas, it is misunderstood and still under challenge, internally within the U.S. Government and from external actors. In this course, the modern origins of democracy support, or promotion, will be examined, beginning with the values-based focus of the Carter Administration's foreign policy leading into its Cold War use in the Reagan presidency. The development of bipartisan democracy promotion through succeeding Administrations up to the challenges under Donald Trump and the Biden Administration's response, including the Summit for Democracy process, will be examined. Real-world applications and connections will be central. How democracy assistance is conducted and how it is perceived will be a focus of the course. Course participants will discuss the relationship between democracy promotion and its distinction with human rights and the concept of "democracy prevention" as a response by external actors to democracy promotion.
outcome: Underline the motivations behind and identify individuals who led the transition towards values-based support of democracy and human rights in U.S. foreign policy, and be able to discuss/summarize the early arguments pro and con for its inclusion., Analyze, interpret, and model policy initiatives related to Washington's democracy support and human rights practice., Explain and assess democracy assistance in light of the U.S. national elections in 2024., Formulate, revise, or predict support for democracy and human rights in future U.S. foreign policy., 

class: PUBPOL 3471
class title: Inside the Presidential Election and Transition
description: The 2024 presidential and congressional elections will be the most important in recent memory. In a highly polarized environment, against a backdrop of often shallow punditry and sound bites, this course will provide real-time analysis of the elections; and provide students with a deep understanding of the structure, organization, and strategic imperatives of the presidential and congressional elections. It will also analyze the presidential transition and the reorganization of a new Congress.
outcome: Analyze how presidential and congressional campaigns are organized and structured., Discover how campaigns develop strategic battlegrounds and pursue operational goals within corresponding electorates., Examine and comprehend the operations and dynamics of the presidential transition and the reorganization of a newly elected House and Senate., Develop the skills needed to work on a presidential/congressional campaign in order to explore career paths., 

class: PUBPOL 3510
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 
distribution categories: (HA-HE, SBA-HE) (HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3550
class title: Economics of Education
description: The economics of education is about understanding how and why people make decisions to invest in education, the effect of education on long-term social and economic outcomes, the behavior of those institutions that "produce" education, and how best to design and implement public policies affecting the level and distribution of education resources. The basic tools of economics provide a framework to evaluate education policies including K-12 school finance, student financial aid, and college admissions. Throughout the course, there will be an emphasis on examining empirical tests of the economic theory and measuring the effects of policy initiatives on educational outcomes. 
outcome: Apply the tools of economic analysis to assess core education policies., Differentiate between human capital and signaling models., Interpret empirical results from research papers as they relate to policy., Describe endogeneity issues in empirical research papers., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000, PUBPOL 3100.

class: PUBPOL 3660
class title: Cryptocurrency, Blockchain, and Public Policy
description: In 2008, a new sector of technological opportunities emerged through the advent of cryptocurrency and blockchain with wide-reaching implications. In this course, we will examine the different types of cryptocurrencies, the underlying technology of blockchain, and the implications they have on public policy. To do so, we will go through a few steps, including a simulation of managing and updating a cryptocurrency portfolio. This will offer a unique opportunity to experience the different types of digital assets, custody solutions for digital assets, and the decentralized nature of the technology that drives data science and tech policies. In addition, you will learn about different types of cryptocurrencies and how they drive financial inclusivity through social policies to reduce inequality. Furthermore, you will analyze the process and operation of Bitcoin mining and its impact on sustainability and environmental policies. Other topics you will examine include blockchain's pseudo-anonymity, decentralized finance (DeFi), decentralized autonomous organizations (DAO), different types of tokens (e.g. non-fungible tokens and stablecoins), central bank digital currencies, the metaverse, and general regulations around the sector. Each of these areas impacts policy, politics, and economics. At the end of the course, you will write a policy paper on cryptocurrency and blockchain, explain the implications it has on public policy, and present your findings in class.
outcome: Explain the fundamentals of cryptocurrency and blockchain and the implications on public policy., Describe how to access, trade, and custody decentralized digital assets and their impact on data science and tech policies., Analyze the different types of social policies for cryptocurrency that drive financial inclusivity and reduce inequality., Identify the opportunities and risks involved with Bitcoin mining and the implications on sustainability and environmental policies., Develop a framework for the politics and economics of Web 3.0 and the emerging opportunities that lie ahead., 

class: PUBPOL 3680
class title: Towards a Policy of Democratic Unity
description: Democratic leaders are increasingly concerned with authoritarian attempts to alter long-established values and interests of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.  Questions as to the abuse of Interpol against dissidents, the harsh reaction by China to WHO attempts to address the pandemic, and the rejection by Russia of its international obligations bring new policy questions but also solutions to this topic. As the international liberal order framework of the last 75 years shows its age, the question of which nations and value systems will shape the world for the next 75 years becomes more pressing.  Are democracies capable of jointly addressing this challenge? How far do democratic alliances go before national interests take charge?   In this course, students will draw upon real-life case studies and scenarios through interaction with diplomats, civil society, and other practitioners in this arena. Students in this course will be equipped to shape the debate of a framework of human rights, the rule of law, and democracy for the future and present their ideas through the use of a structured debate as a final project.
outcome: Critique and debate the ability of democracies to pushback against expanding authoritarianism., Revise or propose a new narrative for concerted action by democracy to protect human rights and democracy in the multilateral system., Differentiate between reforms and attempts to replacement of universal values of human rights and the rule of law., Compare and contrast strategies to promote universal human rights., 

class: PUBPOL 3710
class title: Migration: Histories, Controversies, and Perspectives
description: This introductory course introduces students to issues and debates related to international migration and will provide an interdisciplinary foundation to understanding the factors that shape migration flows and migrant experiences. We will start by reviewing theories of the state and historical examples of immigrant racialization and exclusion in the United States and beyond. We will critically examine the notions of borders, citizenship/non-citizenship, and the creation of diasporas. Students will also hear a range of perspectives by exposing them to Cornell guest faculty who do research and teach on migration across different disciplines and methodologies and in different world areas. Examples include demographic researchers concerned with immigrant inequality and family formation, geographic perspectives on the changing landscapes of immigrant metropolises, legal scholarship on the rights of immigrant workers, and the study of immigrant culture from a feminist studies lens. Offered each fall semester.
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 3720
class title: Addiction Medicine Practice and Policy
description: A community-engaged addiction medicine course that draws from experts in the field to address the neurobiology of addiction, risk and protective factors for substance misuse and addiction, barriers to treatment such as stigma, the recovery continuum, and a focus on drug policy and law in historical and contemporary context. Students will complete a community engaged project and field trips will be offered. This course is geared toward future clinicians, policy makers, healthcare leaders, data analysts, and engaged citizens who care about human wellbeing and health equity.
distribution categories: (HA-HE, KCM-HE) (HA-AG, KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2300 or PUBPOL 2350 or PUBPOL 3280.

class: PUBPOL 3764
class title: Intellectual Property Law and Policy
description: This course covers domestic copyright law, which protects creative expression; patent law, which protects novel and useful inventions; and trademark law, which protects brand identifiers.  It also explores common law intellectual property rights like trade secret protections.  The aim of the course is not simply to learn what the law is, but why.
outcome: Demonstrate understanding of the positive law of copyrights, patents, trademarks, trade secrets, and other similar rights., Utilize the tools of policy analysis to determine how different legal rules could potentially satisfy, or fail to satisfy, policy aims., Analyze and compare the rights given to IP creators in different jurisdictions and their underlying justifications., Exhibit synthetic understanding of legal concepts by drawing upon multiple lines of legal precedent., Formulate and express arguments in favor of specific legal standards to generate given policy outcomes., 

class: PUBPOL 3830
class title: Ethics and Public Policy
description: Ethics asks what is good and bad, what is right and wrong, what is happiness, and what is the virtuous path? We will explore ethical dilemmas of society, how those questions translate into public policy, and how public policy is used to carve an ethic. We will focus on ethical questions future leaders in public policy could, should, or will be asking. We investigate some controversial questions that sit at the core of our own moral connection with public policy ethics and how those translate into action such as human interaction with society and nature, what is our moral responsibility as individuals and decision-makers, equity, and how ethical considerations translate into public policy. These ethical dilemmas public policy actors face, and their decisions can affect many domestically and internationally and impact in intended and unintended ways. Delving into understanding these ethical questions when developing public policies can help decision-makers craft policies that consider sound moral principles that impact stakeholders. This course builds a foundation of ethical principles and philosophies and then translates into action.
outcome: Describe and develop a foundation of knowledge of the foundational theories on ethical principles., Discover, investigate, and explain how ethical concepts translate into public policy and decision-making., Breakdown arguments to identify and compare ethical components., Compare, justify, and explain multiple sides of an argument using values and ethics to drive policy and perspective., 

class: PUBPOL 3890
class title: Rewilding the American West: A Policy Incubator
description: Debates over the proper aims, scope, and methods of environmental policy in America are as old as the conservation movement, from Gifford Pinchot's push for the responsible and productive use of public lands to John Muir's crusade for strict preservation. Over the last forty years, a growing number of scholars and policymakers have embraced a new approach to science-based conservation: rewilding. The term has been used by activists, ecologists, and policymakers to embrace a range of policy proscriptions, from the restoration of wide-ranging wilderness areas and large predators to restoring Pleistocene era megafauna or their ecological equivalents, to landscape restoration through the reintroduction of appropriate species, to productive land abandonment. However, a core principle uniting these disparate approaches is an emphasis on restoring biodiversity and promoting sustainability through the protection and enhancement of wilderness areas. The rewilding movement has also begun to influence public policy, offering innovative solutions to old and new policy challenges, including mitigating the impacts of climate change.
outcome: Understand core scientific concepts undergirding rewilding practices., Apply those concepts to thinking about policy solutions to contemporary problems., Research legislative histories to understand the legislative process and political dynamics shaping a bill's drafting, passage, and implementation., Analyze how legislative drafting, bureaucratic rulemaking, and judicial decisions shape policy implementation., Synthesize this knowledge to identify proposed policy solutions to contemporary conservation and environmental challenges., 

class: PUBPOL 4000
class title: Directed Readings
description: For study that predominantly involves library research and independent reading.

class: PUBPOL 4010
class title: Empirical Research
description: For study that predominantly involves data collection and analysis.

class: PUBPOL 4020
class title: Supervised Fieldwork
description: For study that involves both responsible participation in a community setting and reflection on that experience through discussion, reading, and writing. Academic credit is awarded for this integration of theory and practice.

class: PUBPOL 4030
class title: Teaching Apprenticeship
description: For study that includes assisting faculty with instruction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a course (or equivalent) in which student is assisting and has demonstrated high level of performance.

class: PUBPOL 4060
class title: Engaged Learning About Policy Making in Washington D.C.
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an engaged learning class that focuses on understanding and analyzing the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purpose is to give students a chance to sunthesize the lessons of their internship work by examining and reflecting on that work, investigating the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that the community uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events. An internship is required for the class.
outcome: Students will have employed engaged learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 
distribution categories: (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 4080
class title: Demographic Techniques
description: This course explores social change through demographic methods, addressing how public policies aim to impact societal outcomes—such as reducing crime rates, lowering poverty levels, or increasing voter turnout—rather than focusing on individual behavior. While quantitative social science often emphasizes understanding individual actions, this course provides methods that bridge the gap between individual patterns and broader societal trends. Building on foundational techniques from introductory social statistics courses—such as univariate, bivariate, and multivariate regression—the course covers life tables, Lexis diagrams, and decomposition methods. These demographic methods focus on population-level dynamics and the changing composition of national populations, making the course essential for social scientists and policy analysts interested in examining the trends, causes, and consequences of aggregate social change.
outcome: Demonstrate how to build a life table using various methods and understand the connections between life tables and survival analysis., Think creatively about how to use these methods and existing data to make a novel research contribution., Write clearly about what the results from life tables can tell us about demographic processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2030.

class: PUBPOL 4101
class title: Causal Reasoning and Policy Evaluation I
description: This course covers methods used by social scientists to identify causal relationships in data, with a focus on evaluating the effects of real-world policies. Many social science analyses--including in the economics fields of public, labor, health, and development-aim to answer these types of policy-related causal questions: What is the effect of having health insurance on someone's health? Does the death penalty reduce crime? Will lowering class sizes increase students' academic achievement? The goal of this course is to train you to become both a high-quality consumer and producer of this type of research. You will learn about several research designs and data analysis methods for identifying causal relationships in data, read and assess empirical papers that apply these methods, and apply these methods to datasets yourself.
outcome: Assess the strengths and limitations of different research designs for estimating causal effects., Read and assess the strengths and weaknesses of empirical research answering causal questions., Apply the research designs covered in the course to data-based examples., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 3100 or equivalent.

class: PUBPOL 4370
class title: The Economics of Health Care Markets
description: Health care systems and health policy are undergoing rapid change as medical technology advances and costs rise. Debates concerning the delivery, regulation and financing of health care have intensified. This course uses basic economic tools to analyze central questions in health care today, as well as fundamental issues in health policy: For example, what is the current role of the government in the health sector, and what should it be? What is the social insurance role of the government, and how is it played out in policies that impact the health of the population? How is health insurance structured, and what are the implications of having employers be the providers of private health insurance? This course is about applying economic tools of policy analysis to gain insight into the workings of the health care system and to analyze current issues in health policy. It is mainly a U.S. institutions-based course, with some international comparisons. It should be of interest to students preparing for all kinds of careers in health care, and to others with an interest in important public policy issues.
outcome: Students will gain foundational knowledge for demand-side and supply-side topics tied to health and medical care., Students will be introduced to the common, contemporary methods for causal inference research design., Students will learn to identify and address specific challenges embedded within empirical analyses based on causal inference research design., Students will understand and appreciate nuanced arguments that favor or oppose specific empirical techniques or analytic interpretations in key contexts., Students will apply the newly acquired knowledge and skills by critically evaluating the relevant scientific literature., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 4640
class title: Regulation and Infrastructure Policy
description: Infrastructure provides essential services such as road and highway transportation, ports and airports, communications, electricity, clean drinking water, and wastewater treatment. This course examines policies related to operation, maintenance, and especially funding and financing of critical physical infrastructure. It includes regulatory issues such as controlling market power, ensuring adequate service quality, and maintaining the assets in question.
outcome: Students will be able to explain the motivation and rationale for various types of government policies toward infrastructure., Students will be able to explain the standard set of economic and policy issues that are raised by the unique nature of much infrastructure. This includes the history of those sectors as well as the details of institutional arrangements surrounding them., Students will be able to explain the actual effects of intervention in the infrastructure sector, and why some forms of regulation have been eliminated or modified over time., 

class: PUBPOL 4717
class title: Energy Transition: Policy, Financial, and Business Interactions
description: The course utilizes discussions, presentations, research papers, and simulations to explore the policy, financial, and business implications, opportunities, and risks, of climate change, specifically the energy transition to a low-carbon economy. We will explore potential public policies in the context of their business impacts, effectiveness, and political viability. How does different policy design encourage distinct long-term pathways within a highly capital-intensive industry? What industries are most impacted by a transition to a lower carbon economy? How do incentives and structures influence business actors toward a smoother transition, or wasted capital expenditures, and stranded assets? Are financial markets pricing in an energy transition? What is the role of financial and market regulators in ensuring long-term "beneficial" capital allocation? With an industry in decline, what are the business strategy options for the management of a fossil fuel producer? What are the policy, financial, and business implications for clean energy firms, electric vehicle manufacturers, and the metals and mining industry? Additional readings, research, and presentations are required of Master's students.
outcome: Students will describe potential impacts of the energy transition and related public policy interactions on business outcomes., Students will explain why market actors' incentives and other structural impediments can impede an effective and smooth transition and may also result in stranded assets and destruction of shareholder value., Students will examine financial and strategic approaches in assessing transition risk, and investor and management decisions-making in a carbon-constrained global economy., Students will explain the catalysts driving the speed and magnitude of the energy transition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE) (SBA-AG)

class: PUBPOL 4960
class title: State Policy and Advocacy Clinic I
description: We will learn how to design and advocate for specific state-level public policies by practicing these skills before the legislative and administrative branches of the State of New York. In consultation with the professor, student teams will design public policy proposals based on a review of the academic, governmental and think tank literature; conversations with subject matter experts at Cornell and various NGOs; research and analysis of similar proposals in other states and countries; conversations with state and local policymakers; and discussions with community members and organizations, including community partners with lived experience. Although we will engage in policy design and advocacy primarily in New York State, we will also provide research and policy design services to stakeholders in other states, especially when a comparative or multi-state approach offers strategic benefits.
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of state and local politics in New York, the extent to which legislative and administrative institutions and machinery mold political choices, and the extent to which political considerations influence the menu of viable policy choices. Build a theoretical and practical understanding of legislative and administrative process in New York and other states., Develop a strong understanding of state and local politics in New York, the extent to which legislative and administrative institutions and machinery mold political choices, and the extent to which political considerations influence the menu of viable policy choices., Develop the legal research and reasoning skills needed to engage in comparative state policy analysis; develop a basic understanding of state and federal constitutional constraints on legislative and administrative decision-making., Develop the policy research, design and reasoning skills needed to design and evaluate various policy alternatives. Gain an introduction to basic legislative or regulatory drafting skills., Design, in teams, a creative, compelling, and politically viable state legislative, or administrative solution to a pressing public policy challenge, based on a review of the academic, government and think tank literature, comparative state and country policy research, discussions with subject matter experts, and conversations with community partners and leaders, including community members with lived experience., 

class: PUBPOL 4980
class title: Honors Seminar
description: This course is designed to provide students with guidance and resources as they design and conduct their honors thesis project. As part of this process, students will be introduced to a range of topics and skills related to engaging in research in the social sciences.
outcome: Describe the process, requirements, and timeline for completing the PAM Honors Thesis Program., Formulate and motivate compelling policy relevant research questions in the social sciences., Demonstrate understanding and application of how to conduct independent research., Add additional rows if you need to document additional outcomes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Required prerequisite: PUBPOL 3120.

class: PUBPOL 4990
class title: Honors Program
description: Provides students with the opportunity to undertake basic or applied research that will be preparation of a thesis representing original work of publishable quality. Intended for students who desire the opportunity to extend their interests and efforts beyond the current course offerings in the department. Furthermore, the program is designed to offer the student the opportunity to work closely with a professor on a topic of interest. The number of hours of thesis credit is determined by the student's research mentor. See the director of undergraduate studies for more details.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 3120.

class: PUBPOL 5000
class title: Special Studies
description: This course is for students who wish to conduct independent study under the guidance of a faculty member from the Brooks MPA Program.

class: PUBPOL 5009
class title: Career Management for Public Affairs
description: This course prepares MPA students to enter the job market with the expertise and experience to launch a successful career as well as obtain professional skills necessary to be leaders in the field of public affairs workplace. Topics covered in this course include the importance of self-assessment, the independent job search, networking, and best practices in resume/cover letter writing and interviewing. 
outcome: Students will demonstrate an understanding of current employment opportunities across public, private, and nonprofit sectors public affairs., Students will draft a results-oriented professional resume/CV and cover letter appropriate for pursuing career opportunities in the field of public affairs., Students will effectively use networking tools to research and explore career opportunities based upon career goals., Students will utilize best practices in behavioral based interviewing and effectively demonstrate these practices in a mock interview setting., Students will develop a professional LinkedIn profile that demonstrates best practices in online brand management., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5041
class title: U.S. Immigration Law and Policy
description: This course addresses the major themes and controversies in United States immigration law and policy, including: Constitutional limits on legislative and executive power; the role of administrative agencies and the federal courts; the role of state versus federal decision-makers; the admission and removal (deportation) of noncitizens; protections of asylum-seekers and refugees; illegal immigration; strategies of immigration law enforcement; immigration detention; due process rights in removal proceedings; and civil rights of noncitizens.  This course will also briefly address some key issues in alienage law and policy, including the rights of noncitizens (including noncitizens without immigration status) to education, work and public benefits.
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of the legal framework (Constitutional, statutory, regulatory, or relating to federal court and administrative agency case law) governing immigration policy in the U.S., Develop the legal reasoning tools necessary to analyze legal sources and make legal arguments – both orally and in writing – on behalf of (fictional) clients, including noncitizens and the Department of Homeland Security., Develop a strong understanding of how immigration law works in practice, with an emphasis on legal and empirical evaluation of the extent to which current practices comply (or fail to comply) with basic norms of due process., Develop a strong understanding of how immigration and alienage policy are created, given complex political and institutional factors driving statutory and administrative action at both the federal and state and local levels., Research, understand and analyze the most pressing and fundamental policy dilemmas and trade-offs in the field of immigration policy; learn to analyze empirical evaluations of immigration policies and use them to construct specific policy recommendations., 
distribution categories: (D-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: courses regarding the structure of the U.S. government and policy design courses are helpful but not required.

class: PUBPOL 5050
class title: Refugee Pathways and Resettlement Policy
description: In collaboration with refugee resettlement centers in New York State, this community-engaged course will explore: the global systems of inequality that produce forced migration; the politics of who "gets" to be a refugee; the uncertain pathways from conflict to internal displacement and/or non-permanent settlement; and the policies and process that inform refugee resettlement in Upstate New York. Students will work on collaborative projects with refugee-supporting organizations in Upstate NY and will be required to attend at least one course-organized site visit to a partner organization in either Syracuse or Utica.
outcome: Describe some of the major theoretical and practical conundrums and debates in refugee resettlement policy., Evaluate and critically respond to arguments made by leading migration policy scholars., Explain the primary actors, processes, and governance structures that dictate forced migration, non-permanent settlements and refugee resettlement in a variety of contexts., Compose high-quality work products that are relevant to the practice of refugee resettlement in Upstate New York., Facilitate learning in classroom and community spaces related to refugee policy issues., 

class: PUBPOL 5060
class title: Experiential Learning in Policy Making in Washington, DC
description: The core course at Cornell in Washington is an experiential learning class that focuses on engaging with the professional experience of being in DC. Its primary purposes are to give students to build their understanding of their internship work by analyzing and reflecting on that work, understanding the context and structures of the policy and political world with which they are engaging, and learning and practicing the professional forms of writing that that world uses. This process occurs through readings, written assignments, guest speakers, and signature events.
outcome: Students will have employed experiential learning techniques through readings, class sessions, reflective journals, guest speakers, and other activities to examine the professional norms and codes of working in the policy world., Students will have identified the day-to-day processes of the American policy and political community in DC, its aims and goals, and how it works at the ground level., Students will have composed a series of policy memos and done an oral presentation in order to be able to construct a policy analysis and recommendation., Graduate students will have assessed the state of knowledge in their particular policy area., 

class: PUBPOL 5080
class title: Economics of the U.S. Social Safety Net
description: This course provides an overview of the major programs that make up the social safety net in the United States. We will review the economic rationale behind social programs, identify the economic consequences of these programs, and assess the empirical research on these topics. A major emphasis of the course will be on understanding the strengths and limitations of the core methodologies used in the existing economics literature.
outcome: Identify and explain the reasons for government redistribution and provision of social insurance., Describe the ways in which social programs are implemented in reality, and analyze the potential distortions and consequences of program design using economic reasoning., Evaluate the empirical evidence on the impact of social programs on individual behavior and well-being by applying knowledge of statistical methodology., Formulate and express well-reasoned arguments for or against specific policies through written and oral presentations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 and PUBPOL 3100, or equivalent courses.

class: PUBPOL 5111
class title: Public Administration
description: This course prepares students to work within government departments and agencies, state and local authorities, and nonprofit public benefit corporations; and with private firms working in the public interest at the interface with governments and public benefit corporations. While the emphasis is on local and mid-size organizations, some material will address international and domestic national level organizations. As a first-year graduate program course it prepares students to conduct research on public organizations leadership and management and to be effective in public careers. It also prepares upper-level undergraduate students for internships and entry into public-sector careers.

class: PUBPOL 5113
class title: Key Management Issues in the Biotech and Pharmaceutical Industries
description: This course provides an overview of the key management issues facing the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. The emphasis is on the United States because it is the largest and most profitable market, but we will briefly cover issues affecting global markets.
outcome: Through this course, students will learn to analyze how decisions made throughout drug testing and development impact a drug's performance over its lifecycle., Describe how firms set prices and negotiate with health insurers., Anticipate the pros and cons of a merger, acquisition, or alliance opportunity., Deconstruct and critique drug marketing strategies., 

class: PUBPOL 5119
class title: Leadership for Public Service Executives
description: This course, designed for Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) students, focuses on the role of leaders and leadership in public organizations, such as government entities. It is particularly valuable for students who are pursuing or currently have careers in government at the local, state, or national levels, as well as for those working in private firms that interact with the public sector.
outcome: Students will articulate various leadership approaches and theories in a public affairs context., Students will articulate leadership dynamics in public organizations and the environments in which they operate., Students will discuss leadership models and theories in the context of public organizations to examine their relevance to those institutions and, most importantly, how leaders must adapt their roles to public organizations., 

class: PUBPOL 5122
class title: Negotiation Skills for Executives
description: Public affairs is a field that is heavily shaped by conflict, as well as opportunities for collaboration. Learning how to negotiate conflict and collaboration is therefore essential for successful professional practice. In this course, you will learn how to improve your negotiations skills through applied tools, best practices, and case studies. Students will also have the opportunity to practice their negotiations through live, active negotiation exercises with peers.
outcome: Students will identify and manage their own emotions to improve their ability to negotiate efficiently., Students will predict and manage the other party's emotions to help them reach their negotiations goals., Students will build rapport and trust with their negotiation partner to maximize the flow of information and increase the chances of reaching an integrative solution., 

class: PUBPOL 5128
class title: Rethinking Development for Executives
description: Debates on theories and practice of international development suggest that there have been serious challenges in ensuring aid effectiveness. Substantial investments made by 'donor' countries often fail to yield the intended development results. At the heart of such debates are varying, contested notions and frameworks to achieve 'development' and 'progress'. This short course attempts to familiarize students with how different actors perceive development and how that impacts development programming in local contexts. The course will assess the prevalent paradigms of development, from the United Nations system to the bilateral and multilateral frameworks and from international NGOs to the religious charities. Class participants will learn about the challenges faced and constraints reproduced by the international development bureaucracies. Each week, students would be expected to read and discuss the suggested readings, cite country contexts and address an applied development question. For final project, students will be given the option to apply course readings, discussions to a policy issue that they will complete with independent research and online inquires with development practitioners.
outcome: Students will articulate how different actors perceive development and how that impacts development programming in local contexts., Students will assess the prevalent paradigms of development, from the United Nations system to the bilateral and multilateral frameworks and from international NGOs to the religious charities., Class participants will evaluate the challenges faced and constraints reproduced by the international development bureaucracies., 

class: PUBPOL 5135
class title: World Food Systems and Public Policy
description: This course aims to teach students the basics of global food systems, their governance, and the public policies that shape them across the globe. An emphasis will be put on understanding the interconnections between the developed world and the global south in food consumption and production.
outcome: Develop an in-depth understanding of global food systems, focusing on the governance structures, geopolitical interdependencies between developed and developing nations, and their complex structural intricacies., Explore critical issues and global policies affecting food systems, analyzing case studies that impact consumer choices, world policies, and identifying sustainable solutions to global food security challenges., Understand the interconnections between society, ecology, and governance, and their broader implications for food governance, security, nutritional outcomes, and sustainability., Encourage and enable students to improve communication skills and develop creative and critical faculties through diverse course activities, such as reading, writing, and presenting elevator pitches, writing policy memos, while gaining a nuanced understanding of pressing issues in global food systems., 

class: PUBPOL 5140
class title: Political Journalism
description: This course will explore the traditional dynamic and norms of political press coverage in the United States, and the impact of those patterns on both the government and the nation; some of the ways longstanding norms have recently shifted, and continue to shift; the larger historical forces and long-term trends driving those changes; and the theoretical questions, logistical challenges and ethical dilemmas these changes pose for both political journalists and those they cover. The course will equally cover the practice of political reporting, including weekly analysis and discussion of current press coverage, in-class exercises and simulations, readings from academic and journalistic sources, and visits from leading political reporters and former spokespeople able to offer a firsthand perspective on the topics.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to "think like a journalist," in particular: to understand and interpret the elements of a variety of political reporting, and the editorial decision-making process., Understand, analyze, and contrast how the press and political actors influence each other, and society at large., Compose, evaluate, and assess editorial decisions in real time., Interpret and utilize the basic facts about how various political news beats and platforms operate, including congressional, White House, campaign, investigative, local, print, digital, and television journalism., 

class: PUBPOL 5151
class title: Gender Inequality and Global Policy
description: The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 states that countries should: "Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls" by 2030. What is empowerment and how will we know when it has been achieved? Why is gender inequality a problem for countries? In this course, we formulate answers to these questions through an examination of gender and development policy past and present. We unpack different and often competing definitions of 'empowerment' and 'gender equality' deployed in global policy, and understand the historical lineages of development theory and feminisms that led to 'gender' as an important policy consideration. Importantly, students build analytical tools for evaluating how intersectional experiences of gender shape the impact of these policies on the lives of women, girls, and other gender minorities. This course blends practice and theory, encouraging students to evaluate the material effects of diverse approaches to reducing gender inequality through case studies, writing, and readings in gender and global policy.
outcome: Describe at least three distinct historical movements in gender and development policy and the various feminist theories connected to these movements., Discuss current approaches and major debates in women's 'empowerment' across key policy sectors including: economic growth, education, public health, and agriculture., Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of historical and contemporary gender policy cases for promoting gender equality., Assess SDG 5 as a policy framework for reducing gender inequality globally., Synthesize theoretical and empirical evidence into convincing and cohesive written analytical arguments., 

class: PUBPOL 5190
class title: Nonprofits and Public Policy
description: The Nonprofit sector plays an important role in society and makes up a growing share of the U.S. economy. In this course, we use economic theory and econometric tools to examine the nonprofit market and how it gets shaped by public policy. Topics covered include theories of the nonprofit market, determinants of charitable giving and volunteering, the role played by religion, competition between nonprofits and for-profits in labor markets, and the effects of taxes, subsidies and regulations.
outcome: Describe the main theories explaining the need for having a nonprofit sector., Evaluate whether nonprofits are suitable or needed in different industries., Apply and explain intuition behind economic models that describe the public and nonprofit sectors., Interpret econometric evidence and evaluate appropriateness of methods to address important question in the sector., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000 or ECON 3030 or equivalent.

class: PUBPOL 5200
class title: International Human Rights Law and Policy
description: This course will address major challenges in international human rights law, policy, and practice. Specific topics include children's rights, women's rights, LGBTQI+ rights, the rights of refugees and migrants, the rights of people with disabilities, the rights of minorities and freedom from discrimination, freedom from torture, the right to life, the death penalty, modern slavery, and the right to sustainable development. We will also discuss the role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and corporations with respect to human rights, as well as the impact of actions (and inactions) by states and institutions in the "Global North" on the realization of human rights in states in the "Global South".
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of the legal framework and sources of law (treaties, customary international law, UN institutions and machinery) governing international human rights law and policy, as well as a strong introduction to the substance of many internationally recognized human rights., Build a strong foundation regarding the leading human rights challenges facing people around the world; explore how comparative policy analysis can be helpful in designing effective responses., Develop a keen understanding of how international human rights principles and mechanisms are created and how they work in practice, with an emphasis on political factors and empirical evaluation of the efficacy of various mechanisms., Develop the legal reasoning tools necessary to analyze U.S. legal sources (statutes, regulations, judicial and administrative opinions and guidance) as they relate to international human rights obligations of the U.S., Design a creative, compelling, and politically viable constitutional, legislative, or administrative solution to a pressing human rights challenge in a jurisdiction of your choosing, based on in-depth research and analysis of a particular human rights issue in a particular location., 

class: PUBPOL 5210
class title: Intermediate Microeconomics for Public Affairs
description: The primary learning goals of this course are (1) to understand the core concepts of microeconomics and (2) to develop analytical/problem-solving skills. This course differs from typical intermediate-level microeconomic courses in that there will be more emphasis on the role of policy and the public sector in the economy, although understanding the role and effectiveness of markets will remain central.  This course is not a substitute for a full-semester comprehensive course in public economics but is a good foundation for that field-level course.
outcome: Understand the basic principles of microeconomics., Develop analytical/problem solving skills using tools of microeconomic analysis., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5270
class title: Constitutional Law: An Introduction
description: In this course, we will examine one of the most important documents in American history – our Constitution.  Course topics will include the historical background of the document from the Magna Carta to the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation.  We will look at the creation of the Constitution, including the conflict between strong supporters of this proposed new Constitution (Federalists) and their opponents (Anti-Federalists). How did the Founders resolve their differences and what led the States to adopt a document limiting and balancing the powers of the President, Congress, and the Judiciary? We shall look at the constant tension (from the beginning to the present) over the balance of power between the three co-equal branches.  We shall discuss the role of the Constitution from both empirical and theoretical perspectives and look at how it has evolved from 1788 to the present day. Special attention will be paid to the use of Amendments, particularly the Bill of Rights, to address events/circumstances unforeseen by the drafters.  Finally, the course will discuss critical cases where the Supreme Court defined and redefined what the Constitution meant.
 
outcome: Students will identify key stakeholders in the formulation of the Constitution., Students will identify and discuss key cases in controversy in which the Supreme Court ruled to establish clear parameters on how the Constitution has been interpreted for more than 200 years with an emphasis on the Bill of Rights., Students will analyze why the Constitution remains such an important aspect an influence in American daily life., (graduate students) Assess the scholarly understanding of the role of the Constitution and Constitutional Law in American politics and policy., 

class: PUBPOL 5310
class title: Applied Multivariate Statistics in Public Affairs
description: This class is an applied introduction to multivariate statistical inference that is aimed at graduate students with little prior statistical experience, and satisfies the Quantitative Methods and Analytics requirement in the MPA Program. We will begin with a brief introduction to basic statistical concepts and probability theory before introducing the linear regression model. We then review several tools for diagnosing violations of statistical assumptions, including how to deal with outliers, missing data, omitted variables, and weighting. We will next consider situations in which linear regression will yield biased estimates of the population parameters of interest, with particular attention paid to measurement error, selection on unobservables, and omitted variables. The course will end with an introduction to extensions of the linear regression model, including models for binary and categorical outcomes. While statistical modeling is the focus of the course, we proceed with the assumption that models are only as good as the theoretical and substantive knowledge behind them. Thus, in covering the technical material, we will spend considerable time discussing the link between substantive knowledge and statistical practice. The course is designed primarily for professional masters students.
outcome: Conduct statistical analysis using the multiple regression tool., Diagnosis and understand the limitations to the multiple regression tool., Interpret results from a linear model., Critically assess statistical models displayed in scholarly research articles., Produce a data and research project using multivariate tools., 

class: PUBPOL 5313
class title: Managerial Statistics for Public Affairs Executives
description: An introduction to statistical methods commonly used in managerial decision making. Topics to be covered include the descriptive analysis of data, inferential methods (estimation and hypothesis testing), regression and correlation analysis, as well as quality control methods. The course will involve a research project designed to give experience in collecting and interpreting data.
outcome: Demonstrate analytical and functional competency in basic statistical skills., Demonstrate a working knowledge of ethics as it relates to statistical analysis and communication., Demonstrate the ability to solve practical problems., Develop skills to be critical consumers of business and policy research., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5320
class title: Mental Health Care Delivery and Policy
description: Mental illnesses are common in the United States. More than 1 in 5 adults (greater than 50 million people) live with a mental health illness and 1 in 5 youth (ages 13-18) will have experienced a seriously debilitating mental illness in their lifetime. Yet, less than half of those who need treatment receive it: Depression is the leading cause of disability, suicide is the 2nd leading cause of death among youth aged 10-14, and unmet mental health needs have profound long-term consequences including reductions in overall health and quality of life; substance use and addiction; family disruption; criminal justice system involvement; homelessness; unemployment and productivity losses; and early preventable mortality. This course provides an overview of the state of mental health in the United States with a focus on the drivers of mental well-being, mental illness, and mental health inequities. We will examine how mental health practice and policy can improve (or impede) community mental well-being, quality of mental health care, and mental health outcomes for those experiencing mental illness. Intentional focus will be given to topics such as stigma, historical trauma, and racism in addition to the importance of culturally intentional and patient-centered evidence-based care in order to collectively envision healthier and more equitable futures.
outcome: Define mental health and poor mental health including mental illness and disability., Describe the overall burden of mental illness in the US and its drivers, consequences, evidence-based treatment best practices, and historical and contemporary mental health policy., Working in pairs or trios, demonstrate the competencies described in #2 by co-authoring a 4-stage research project, including a 5-minute lightning talk, for an instructor-approved mental health issue and population of their choosing., Use Photovoice as a personal lens for critical reflection on historical and contemporary mental health structures and inequities to envision mentally healthier futures for all., Consider different perspectives and demonstrate multicultural competence and inclusive communication while working in diverse groups in class., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: PUBPOL 5280.

class: PUBPOL 5340
class title: Regulation and Infrastructure Policy
description: Infrastructure provides essential services such as road and highway transportation, ports and airports, communications, electricity, clean drinking water, and wastewater treatment. This course examines policies related to operation, maintenance, and especially funding and financing of critical physical infrastructure. It includes regulatory issues such as controlling market power, ensuring adequate service quality, and maintaining the assets in question.
outcome: Students will be able to explain the motivation and rationale for various types of government policies toward infrastructure., Students will be able to explain the standard set of economic and policy issues that are raised by the unique nature of much infrastructure. This includes the history of those sectors as well as the details of institutional arrangements surrounding them., Students will be able to explain the actual effects of intervention in the infrastructure sector, and why some forms of regulation have been eliminated or modified over time., 

class: PUBPOL 5343
class title: Program Evaluation for Executives
description: This course is a general introduction to evaluation research for assessing social programs and interventions. The course uses an evolutionary and systems thinking perspective on evaluation. Students will learn essential concepts in program evaluation that will enable them to design a high-quality evaluation plan for a program or intervention. The basic steps involved in creating any evaluation plan are explained, including: 1) Preparation (entering the system, developing a memorandum of understanding, identifying internal stakeholders, creating working group(s), and assessing evaluation capacity); 2) Program Model Development (stakeholder analysis, program review, program boundary analysis, program lifecycle analysis, logic modeling, program pathway models, setting evaluation scope, identifying relevant prior research); and 3) Evaluation Plan Creation (evaluation purpose, evaluation questions/hypotheses, measurement, sampling, design, data management and analysis, reporting and utilization).
outcome: Students will be able to describe evolutionary and systems thinking principles., Students will be able to describe how to prepare for an evaluation planning effort., Students will be able to describe the basic components of an evaluation plan, including evaluation questions, sampling, measurement, design and analysis., Students will be able to produce a high-quality program model report that could be used to plan an evaluation., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5362
class title: Spreadsheet Modeling for Executives
description: This is a hands-on course in spreadsheet-based modeling and data. This course is designed for professionals who have a basic understanding of Microsoft Excel and want to take their data analysis and quantitative modeling skills to a new level. The footprint is a compilation of highly reusable material that has been selected for its relevance, immediate applicability, and productivity value. Topics include making data usable, developing flexible dashboards to enable insight discovery, and building evaluation models to quantify tradeoffs in the presence of uncertainty. A variety of data analysis and decision problems will be introduced that incorporate relevant concepts from probability, and statistics. User-friendly design and robust construction will be emphasized.
outcome: Students will convert a raw data set into one that is complete, clean, and ready to use as a dashboard source., Students will use user-friendly dashboards to enable discovery and diagnosis., Students will build robust evaluation models that assess tradeoffs and incorporate the impact of uncertainty., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: enrollment in Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) Program.

class: PUBPOL 5370
class title: Economics of Health Care Markets
description: Health care systems and health policy are undergoing rapid change as medical technology advances and costs rise. Debates concerning the delivery, regulation and financing of health care have intensified. This course uses basic economic tools to analyze central questions in health care today, as well as fundamental issues in health policy: For example, what is the current role of the government in the health sector, and what should it be? What is the social insurance role of the government, and how is it played out in policies that impact the health of the population? How is health insurance structured, and what are the implications of having employers be the providers of private health insurance? This course is about applying economic tools of policy analysis to gain insight into the workings of the health care system and to analyze current issues in health policy. It is mainly a U.S. institutions-based course, with some international comparisons. It should be of interest to students preparing for all kinds of careers in health care, and to others with an interest in important public policy issues.
outcome: Understand the objectives and behavior of the key stakeholders in the US healthcare system: payers, insurers, providers, and suppliers., Apply basic economic reasoning to examine health policy issues and proposals., Policy Analysis., Expertise in a Substantive Policy Area., 

class: PUBPOL 5400
class title: Economics of Consumer Policy
description: This course is designed to develop students' critical understanding of government policies aimed toward protecting consumers' wellbeing in markets. The course uses the tools of microeconomic analysis to investigate the various rationales for and the effects of these forms of government regulation. Economic theory is applied to the study of specific consumer protection policies in the United States and elsewhere.
outcome: Describe specific consumer protection regulations in place in a variety of markets; compare policies across markets and across government jurisdictions., Use concepts from information economics and behavioral economics to explain the rationale for specific types of consumer protection regulations., Analyze the predicted efficiency and distributional consequences of consumer protection regulations, using the tools of microeconomics., Use empirical evidence to critically analyze the performance of regulations., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2000, ECON 3030, or intermediate knowledge of microeconomics is required.

class: PUBPOL 5407
class title: Mediation for Managers and Executives
description: Conflict is an inherent part of organizational life. Nevertheless, organizational members often lack the adequate skills necessary to manage and resolve the host of tensions and disagreements that arise at work. Negotiation is a broad category that encompasses direct negotiation between two or more parties, mediation, and arbitration to help settle disputes. This course is designed to develop and strengthen students' conflict resolution skills with a focus on the mediation of organizational conflicts. As such, the course will provide students with a theoretical and practical understanding of the mediation process. This foundation will then be used to apply mediation concepts and principles to everyday workplace conflict. By understanding how to properly set expectations, adapt to the needs of the disputing parties, channel emotions in a productive way, and help the parties to problem solve in a way that addresses everyone's interests, students will be better able to handle the inevitable workplace conflict and prevent it from escalating.
outcome: Students will analyze and identify different features and characteristics of workplace conflict., Students will select an appropriate mediation style in resolving a conflict., Students will recognize the role of emotions in a given conflict., Students will demonstrate the problem-solving capacity of mediation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: enrollment in the Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) Program.

class: PUBPOL 5414
class title: Project Management
description: This hands-on, graduate-level course is designed to prepare leaders how to best manage public sector projects including but not limited to government agencies, nonprofits, consulting firms, and think tanks. The goal of this course is to build project management strategies including fundamental processes as well as invest in innovative trends and new approaches to plan, manage, and implement projects. The class also includes skill building to effectively manage teams which includes leadership, equity, critical thinking, and conflict resolution. As a graduate-level course, students are expected have thoroughly read all assigned materials prior to class and to be well-prepared to participate meaningfully throughout the semester. This course is highly engaged, and students will be working on teams collaborating throughout the semester to practice these skills.
outcome: Students will demonstrate how to plan, schedule, manage, and control projects including timelines, budgets, and all aspects of project implementation., Students will demonstrate effective management strategies and leadership skills including conflict resolution, forming project teams, and managing performance., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5415
class title: Project Management for Executives
description: This Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) course is designed to prepare leaders on how to best manage public sector projects including but not limited to government agencies, nonprofits, consulting firms, and think tanks. The goal of this course is to build project management strategies including fundamental processes, innovative trends, and approaches to plan, manage, and implement projects. The course also invests in skill building to effectively manage teams which includes equity, critical thinking, and conflict resolution. This course is highly engaging, and students will be working on teams collaborating to build these skills.
outcome: Students will develop and apply fundamental project management strategies as well as innovative trends and new approaches to project management., Students will build a management toolkit for effective project implementation., Students will apply leadership skill sets including conflict resolution, equity, inclusivity, project teams, and managing performance., 

class: PUBPOL 5423
class title: Financial Accounting for Executives
description: In this course, you will construct and interpret accounts of revenue, accounts receivable, inventory, assets, long-term debt, and equity. You will have the opportunity to examine the rules for financial statements and learn how the field of financial accounting has evolved over time to meet the needs of businesses, particularly those in the healthcare industry. This understanding of core financial accounting principles will enable you to independently analyze an organization's financial standing and viability as well as understand when organizations are using gaps in accounting rules to their financial advantage.
outcome: Students will construct and interpret accounts of revenue, accounts receivable, inventory, assets, long-term debt, and equity., Students will examine the rules for financial statements and learn how the field of financial accounting has evolved over time to meet the needs of businesses, particularly those in the healthcare industry., Students will be able to converse confidently in the language of finance and present a company's financial performance to internal stakeholders as well as investors, creditors, suppliers, and customers., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5424
class title: Public Budgeting and Finance for Executives
description: This course will contribute to the success of future public and nonprofit leaders by introducing them to a critical aspect of public service management - budgeting and finance. The class covers the terminology, components, practices, documents, and methods of public budgeting and finance at all levels of government and in the non-profit world.
outcome: Students will articulate the basics of budget terminology and structure; prepare basic budgets and link to organizational objectives; Practice using budget documents to do basic analysis and learn the basics of communicating results effectively., Students will master the basics of income statements and balance sheets and how to use financial and performance ratios to help evaluate them to acquire an understanding of the budget approval process with specific examples., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5425
class title: Accounting for Corporate, Governmental, and Nonprofit Organizations
description: This course is designed for students who have no previous training or experience in accounting. It consists of 5 modules: Fundamental Accounting Issues, Financial Accounting Issues, Managerial Accounting Issues, Nonprofit Accounting Issues, and Governmental Accounting Issues. In each module, where appropriate, financial statement analysis/ratio analysis will be incorporated to facilitate a deeper understanding of the material. Students will demonstrate their knowledge of the material in three ways: exams, case studies, and participation/article discussions.
outcome: Identify the differences between financial accounting, managerial accounting, nonprofit accounting, and governmental accounting., Read, interpret, and analyze corporate, nonprofit, and governmental financial statements., Participate in budgeting activities and budget analysis., Demonstrate a basic knowledge of Federal taxation and how it applies to different business entities., 

class: PUBPOL 5433
class title: Managing Change in Public Affairs for Executives
description: This graduate-level course addressing change management processes in public administration is designed for Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) students pursuing careers in government agencies, state and local authorities, and nonprofit organizations; and with private firms working in the public interest at the interface with government agencies. A central theme of the course is planning and understanding how to implement change processes within public institutions to ensure they welcome change and remain vibrant learning organizations at the service of their constituents. The objectives of the course are to provide students with analytical tools to properly implement change management processes in government institutions where organizational change is rarely encouraged or practiced. Concepts are paired with a case study for the class as well as empower students to develop a controlled case study of their own to encourage learning through application. As a graduate-level course, students are expected to have thoroughly read all materials prior to class and be well-prepared to discuss readings/cases/case memos with colleagues.
outcome: Students will change management opportunities and challenges for public institutions., Students will use analytical tools for designing and implementing change processes., Students will plan and manage change in their own organizations., 

class: PUBPOL 5435
class title: Public and Nonprofit Marketing for Executives
description: In this course students will learn how to develop marketing strategies and messages for nonprofit organizations and how to apply these strategies to the promotion of public policy. Students will understand how traditional marketing techniques can be very useful for increasing charitable donations, gaining support for a public issue, recruiting volunteers, and achieving an organizational mission. The course will cover how to develop key elements of strategic marketing campaigns, including SWOT analysis, SMART goals and objectives, message construction, and creative stories for digital media. We will be exploring cases of mission-driven organizations and entities including government; health and human services; social, economic, and racial justice; education; and the environment.
outcome: Students will examine the basics of branding, framing, and re-branding in the not-for-profit space, including the long-term effects of good/bad messaging on an organization., Students will differentiate between a variety of tools, approaches and methods for traditional and digital media, strategies to employ them, and metrics for measurement., Students will develop an effective, research-based marketing strategy for nonprofit organizations or public policy., Students will apply the skills and knowledge gained throughout the course to recognize, analyze, and draft effective stories and messages that aptly portray an organization's core mission and vision., 

class: PUBPOL 5441
class title: Effective Writing for Public Policy
description: The course explores policy writing in its various forms, including: memos, briefs, position papers, op-eds, legislative testimony, formal letters, email, press releases, and social media. This course will feature lectures, interactive discussion, written deliverables, workshops, and guest speakers. As a graduate-level course, students are expected to have thoroughly read all materials prior to class and be prepared to discuss readings in class.
outcome: Identify and assess targeted audience for writing in the context public policymaking and develop effective written communication., Generate evidence for a written argument., Draft a variety of written communication pieces that demonstrate mastery of the various genres of writing associated with public policy., Demonstrate peer review techniques, such as editing and critiquing writing by peers., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5442
class title: Effective Policy Writing for Public Affairs Executives
description: The course explores policy writing in its various forms, including: memos, briefs, position papers, op-eds, legislative testimony, formal letters, email, press releases, and social media. While this course is designed for Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) students. This course will feature lectures, interactive discussion, written deliverables, workshops, and guest speakers.  As a graduate-level course, students are expected to have thoroughly read all materials prior to class and be prepared to discuss readings in class.
outcome: Identify and assess targeted audience for writing in the context public policymaking and develop effective written communication., Generate evidence for a written argument., Draft a variety of written communication pieces that demonstrate mastery of the various genres of writing associated with public policy., Demonstrate peer review techniques, such as editing and critiquing writing by peers., Add additional rows if you need to document additional outcomes., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5443
class title: Systems Thinking for Executives I
description: This course serves as an introduction to systems thinking methods and technical tools that are foundational to all other advanced Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) coursework. This course focuses on answering three essential questions: (1) Why does systems thinking exist (i.e., its promise and popularity)? (2) What is systems thinking? (3) How do we do systems thinking? We also explore two subsequent questions: (4) How do we apply systems thinking to personal mastery and professional development? (5) How do we apply systems thinking to the social and policy challenges we face?
outcome: Students will demonstrate a deep understanding of systems thinking and its application to public sector planning and management issues., Students will demonstrate proficiency with systems thinking modeling techniques., Students will be able to tackle complex problems from multiple perspectives that can get in the way of policy analysis, planning, evaluation, leadership, and management., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5444
class title: Systems Thinking for Executives II
description: This course explores the functional elements required to design, develop, lead, and manage a complex adaptive organization (CAO) through the lens of Systems Thinking. Students will explore the essential importance of organizational learning and development of culture through shared mental models in order to perform a thorough analysis of mission-critical systems that yield capacity for carrying out coordinated daily tasks that subsequently achieve the vision of the organization.
outcome: Students will use the Systems Leadership Framework (VMCL) to design, align, and lead an adaptive learning organization, and Diagnose Plan, Command, Control, and Utilize (PCCU) organizational design thinking errors and differentiate PCCU from VMCL., Students will use checks to analyze the implicit Mission of an existing organization using the underlying simple rules of a Complex Adaptive System (CAS), analyze system behavior to identify system structure failures (aka, "system structure determines behavior," or SSDB), and map an organization's Capacity Systems for organizational understanding (CapMap)., Students will demonstrate fractal use of VMCL across levels of scale in organizations (individual, team, department, and whole organization)., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5449
class title: Systems Thinking in Public Affairs
description: This course serves as an introduction to systems thinking methods and technical tools in the field of public affairs.  Students will develop skills that allow them to understand how to improve their analysis of complex, unpredictable, real-world systems.
outcome: Students will demonstrate deep understanding of systems thinking and its application to public sector planning and management issues., Students will be able to tackle complex problems from multiple perspectives based on both a deeper understanding of complex systems as well as the cognitive biases that get in the way of policy analysis, planning, evaluation, leadership, and management., Students will gain a general understanding of systems thinking as a field and the many tools and technologies available to solve problems or analyze complex systems., Students will demonstrate proficiency in applying systems thinking modeling techniques., Students will integrate concepts learned in class through a team project to solve a wicked problem, analyze a complex systems, or serve an unmet need using systems thinking and modeling. Project presentations will be the highlight of an annual MPA Systems Thinking conference/symposium and will be evaluated by an expert panel of judges., 

class: PUBPOL 5450
class title: Democracy Promotion in Modern U.S. Foreign Policy
description: Promotion and support of democracy is a well-established principle of U.S. foreign policy. However, even four decades after its insertion into Washington's approach overseas, it is misunderstood and still under challenge, internally within the U.S. Government and from external actors. In this course, the modern origins of democracy support, or promotion, will be examined, beginning with the values-based focus of the Carter Administration's foreign policy leading into its Cold War use in the Reagan presidency. The development of bipartisan democracy promotion through succeeding Administrations up to the challenges under Donald Trump and the Biden Administration's response, including the Summit for Democracy process, will be examined. Real-world applications and connections will be central. How democracy assistance is conducted and how it is perceived will be a focus of the course. Course participants will discuss the relationship between democracy promotion and its distinction with human rights and the concept of "democracy prevention" as a response by external actors to democracy promotion.
outcome: Underline the motivations behind and identify individuals who led the transition towards values-based support of democracy and human rights in U.S. foreign policy, and be able to discuss/summarize the early arguments pro and con for its inclusion., Analyze, interpret, and model policy initiatives related to Washington's democracy support and human rights practice., Explain and assess democracy assistance in light of the U.S. national elections in 2024., Formulate, revise or predict support to democracy and human rights in future U.S. foreign policy., 

class: PUBPOL 5451
class title: International Public and NGO Management
description: This course offers students the opportunity to understand and analyze the key structural, operational, and ethical issues involved in the governance of international NGOs. What does it mean to be the leader of an international nonprofit organization in an era of globalizing operations, donor-funded policy agendas, and decolonial social movements? We construct an answer to this question through a broad examination of the role of international nonprofit organizations in global policy, and a detailed study of the accountability mechanisms produced by basic nonprofit structure, and diverse models of nonprofit leadership and governance. Course learning is delivered through lectures, in class discussion, and case study analysis.

class: PUBPOL 5455
class title: Comparative Public Administration
description: The purpose of this seminar is to provide graduate students with an introduction to the scholarly development of comparative public administration, as well as criteria for comparison in public leadership, accountability/transparency, political participation, and the interaction of culture, politics, and public management.
outcome: Students will describe criteria for comparison in public administration and apply global benchmarking frameworks for evaluating public administration and urban policy., Students will discuss problems with engaging in comparative field research on public administration (case selection, cultural factors, etc.), and apply remedies in their own research designs., Students will develop an original scholarly analysis of one or more aspects of urban policy agenda., 

class: PUBPOL 5500
class title: Introduction to Senior Living and Related Programs
description: With the aging population, longer life expectancies and the population bulge of the baby boomers, serving both the hospitality and housing/care needs of seniors will be a tremendous growth area. The facilities and programs to serve these populations have certain specialized aspects related to healthcare, but they also share a number of the operating characteristics of many hospitality and real estate operations and design.
outcome: Identify and categorize a number of facility issues and special attributes on the design and operations of senior housing, assisted living and CCRCs., Write a brief description of some unique aspects of branding, marketing and sales approaches to senior housing and assisted living properties., Explain some current or potential future trends and innovations and to be able to identify at least one potential entrepreneurial opportunity in the field., Describe different financing options available to developers of senior living facilities and distinguish some of the advantages and disadvantages between them., Identify opportunities to apply hospitality approaches to healthcare settings whether it be senior living or related areas., 

class: PUBPOL 5510
class title: United We Stand - Divided We Fall: The Rise of Polarization and Social Division - and What it Means
description: When did bipartisan become a bad word? Should we unfriend and unfollow people who have different opinions than our own? How did we become a country that grows more polarized and divided every year? Most importantly, can we change, or are we destined to continue down this path?
outcome: Students will identify and describe long term trends, key individuals, and events impacting politics in the U.S., Students will analyze the impacts of those key individuals and events and discuss how those impacts are likely to affect future U.S. politics., Students will formulate possible strategies to reinforce, or alter, current trends within the U.S., Students will research and synthesize the scholarly understanding of specific aspects of polarization (graduate students)., 

class: PUBPOL 5543
class title: Health Law for Managers
description: This course examines how health law and regulations affect health care systems so that administrators and executives can proactively plan to avoid pitfalls that impede operational efficiencies, quality of care delivered and organizational profitability. By presenting a wide range of legal issues encountered in health care, this course is designed to equip students with an understanding of the legal environment in which health care services are provided and to develop skills in analyzing many of the current legal and ethical issues facing health care practitioners, administrators and other decision-makers.
outcome: Use substantive legal doctrine fundamental to this course to identify and evaluate ethical considerations and other requirements professionals and organizations must comply with in the practice of medicine., Describe the legal issues that affect health care providers and apply legal reasoning and analysis to solve problems in a logical and structured manner to issues covered in this course., Explain how risks arise by examining real life cases involving fraud and abuse, tort liability, medical malpractice, and be able to communicate effectively as to the legal reasoning and analysis of these cases., 

class: PUBPOL 5563
class title: Managerial Finance
description: This course provides an introduction to business finance through video lectures and assignments. Topics include basic financial accounting, time value of money, stock and bond valuation, capital budgeting, portfolio theory, asset-pricing models, cost of capital, dealing with risk, capital structure, acquisitions, and options. Application of theory to practical applications will be emphasized.
outcome: Perform basic valuation of cash flows from projects, bonds, and stocks., Make capital budgeting decisions through the use of concepts including the time value of money and discounted cash flow analysis., Assess the relationship between risk and return and integrate that knowledge in determining corporate cost of capital., Explain the role of debt and equity in corporate capital structure., 

class: PUBPOL 5570
class title: Health Care Organizations
description: This course familiarizes students with the organizational structure of the U.S. health care system. First, we will talk about the history of U.S. health care and develop an understanding of the financial streams and different institutions. Second, we will study the purpose of and issues related to health insurance and the different coexisting U.S. insurance systems. We will also analyze why people are un- and underinsured and how health care reforms tried to address this issue. Third, we will learn about health care providers, outpatient and inpatient care as well as reimbursement methods, including "value-based" reimbursement. Then, we study access and quality of medical care. Finally, we will discuss rising health care costs in an international comparison and briefly talk about other health care systems.
outcome: Understanding the basic organizational setup of the US health care system, also from a historical perspective, its various components, how they relate and interact., Gaining a good knowledge of the financial flows within and between the system components, how health care in the US is financed, and how providers are reimbursed., Understanding the main objectives und functions of (health) insurances from a theoretical point of view and why theory and reality may differ., Acquiring tools to understand and analyze the economic incentives at work between insurers and providers as well as between providers and insurees., Identifying key problem areas within the US health care system; evaluating reform proposals with the tools and knowledge acquired throughout the course, and making own reform suggestions., Understanding the legislative and political process of health policy reforms, how it relates to the general organization of the health care system, and developing awareness of issues entailed., Assimilating different basic principles of how health care systems can be organized; understanding organizational differences between the American and other international health care systems., Acquiring the ability to understand and analyze complex issues and processes., Learning to isolate objective arguments from value judgments and ideology and why this is of particular importance when health care is involved, Practicing how to provide constructive critique and how to deal with constructive critique; improving the ability to work effectively in teams and learning how to express arguments and ideas in a constructive, clear and concise manner., 

class: PUBPOL 5583
class title: Managing Operations
description: This course prepares students to think analytically and managerially about operations processes, and to use the tools and intuition they acquire to ensure that the operations in production and service systems support the business strategies for these systems. A process view of operations will be used to analyze different key operational dimensions such as flow time management, service operations management, quality management, inventory management and supply chain management.
outcome: Use quantitative techniques to support decision making in general operations settings., Analyze different key operational dimensions such as flow time management, service operations management, quality management, inventory management and supply chain management., Describe strategies to improve the operational performance of an organization., 

class: PUBPOL 5607
class title: Global Policy Challenges
description: This course will provide an overview of critical global policy challenges, with a focus on their implications for international relations and international policy. Students will explore the complexities of international relations, global climate change, conflict trends, disruptive technologies, nuclear proliferation, the great power implications of the space race, and emerging global policy challenges. By the end of the course, students will be equipped with the knowledge and analytical skills necessary to address pressing global issues and propose informed policy solutions.
outcome: Students will debate the complexities of international relations, global climate change, conflict trends, disruptive technologies, nuclear proliferation, the great power implications of the space race, and emerging global policy challenges., Students will conduct independent research and write a short policy report on a global challenge of their choice from the module syllabus, arguing why it is the most important challenge for policymakers today., 

class: PUBPOL 5640
class title: Data Analytics in Health Care
description: This course provides students with a hands-on understanding of how to make the best use of the data available within a healthcare setting to improve patient care, healthcare operations and overall healthcare system. Students will be expected to complete case studies and hands on analysis with healthcare data.  Throughout the course students will learn basic and intermediate SQL concepts.

class: PUBPOL 5659
class title: Cross-Cultural Communication for Executives
description: When you're at work, you probably interact with employees, clients, and leaders from different backgrounds and cultures. Your Social Style® plays a role in how you communicate and behave in the workplace and how others, in turn, interact with you. This course will prepare you to communicate effectively, efficiently, and empathetically with people of different cultural backgrounds no matter your Social Style®.
outcome: Evaluate how your Social Style® is interpreted by others., Become aware of your social blind spots in the cross-cultural work environment., Adapt for effective communication., 

class: PUBPOL 5660
class title: Strategic Management and Organizational Design of Health Care Systems
description: Examines strategy and design issues faced by health care organizations. Topics include analysis of market conditions, organizational culture issues, development of an organizational mission and management strategy, the management of professionals, and the importance of roles, structure, and interand intra-institutional relationships within organizations. Taught via a case study approach.
outcome: Understand the strategic options available to different types of health care organizations., Recognize the relation of these strategic options to core underlying economic principles that determine firm and industry outcomes., Determine how  health care organizations choose the optimal strategy from the available options., 

class: PUBPOL 5679
class title: Desktop and Modeling Solutions
description: This course presents an advanced approach to data-intensive problem-solving using Microsoft Excel. Advanced concepts such as external queries, data tables, arrays, iterative techniques and macros will be reviewed. These will then be incorporated into an integrated business model. Emphasis will be on clear, separated input and output, data integrity, user interface design, documentation, maintainability, robustness and user support.
outcome: To master the vocabulary of personal computing., To understand the essentials of desktop and file management, especially with regard to security, safety, privacy, and protection against data loss., To be able to discriminate between seemingly competing software applications (spreadsheet, database, etc...) and be able to select the best application, or combination of applications, suited to a particular task., To become highly proficient in the use of MS Office suite. The focus is on understanding the characteristics of each application and the tasks they are best suited to support., To become an effective technological problem-solver, capable of assessing an overall problem, and understanding what the best combination of software applications, tools, and techniques are to address the problem., To expand students' Excel function vocabulary into the more flexible function categories, such as text parsing, time and date manipulation, index, lookup, and array functions., To expand students' ability to work with compound and nested logic within Excel formulas., To learn how to implement data protection and validation strategy to maximize model robustness., To learn how to use macros to automate redundant data management tasks., To maximize understanding of Excel's charting engine in order to exploit advanced charting and graphing features.

Outcome 11: To give students the experience and rigor of breaking a substantial problem down into its constituent pieces to allow for programmatic solution., 

class: PUBPOL 5680
class title: Towards a Policy of Democratic Unity
description: Democratic leaders are increasingly concerned with authoritarian attempts to alter long-established values and interests of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.  Questions as to the abuse of Interpol against dissidents, the harsh reaction by China to WHO attempts to address the pandemic, and the rejection by Russia of its international obligations bring new policy questions but also solutions to this topic. As the international liberal order framework of the last 75 years shows its age, the question of which nations and value systems will shape the world for the next 75 years becomes more pressing.  Are democracies capable of jointly addressing this challenge How far do democratic alliances go before national interests take charge?   In this course, students will draw upon real-life case studies and scenarios through interaction with diplomats, civil society, and other practitioners in this arena. Students in this course will be equipped to shape the debate of a framework of human rights, the rule of law, and democracy for the future and present their ideas through the use of a structured debate as a final project.
outcome: Critique and debate the ability of democracies to pushback against expanding authoritarianism., Revise or propose a new narrative for concerted action by democracy to protect human rights and democracy in the multilateral system., Differentiate between reforms and attempts to replacement of universal values of human rights and the rule of law., Compare and contrast strategies to promote universal human rights., 

class: PUBPOL 5690
class title: Regression Analysis and Managerial Forecasting
description: Teaches various statistical methods for managerial decision making, with a particular emphasis on regression and forecasting. Other topics include ANOVA, correlation, confounding, interaction, and statistical process control. Emphasizes applications to health care organizations.
outcome: Be able to understand basic statistical data presentations using averages, standard deviation, tstatistics, and hypothesis tests., Use bi-variate and multivariate regression analysis techniques., Use dummy variables and fixed effects to analyze cross-state data., Use dummy variables and trend variables to analyze seasonal trends and make short-run forecasts., Understand the issues of endogeneity, correlation and causation when analyzing the relationship between variables., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one statistics course.

class: PUBPOL 5700
class title: Accounting, Financial Reporting and Decision Making
description: Introduces the basic concepts of financial and managerial accounting with emphasis on health care applications. Explains the measurement system of business operations, business valuation, financial reporting, budgeting, cost allocation, service and product costing, and special reports for managerial use. Ethical and international issues are integrated throughout the course materials with real world applications. At the conclusion of the course, students should be able to read, understand, and analyze the annual financial reports of an organization. Collaborative learning, cases, discussions, readings, research, presentations, speakers, problem solving, videotapes, and lectures are used for teaching the course.
outcome: Classify transactions and their impact on financial statements., Identify relevant accounting concepts and how they impact financial reporting., Analyze cost data for managerial decision making and explain and assess the budget making process within a health care organization., Analyze and present the financial position and results of operations for a business entity in the health care field., 

class: PUBPOL 5703
class title: Financial Accounting for Managers
description: Health Care Accounting is an introductory analytical course which emphasizes theory and concepts. However, accounting is a technical discipline and some mastery of technique is needed to demonstrate an understanding of theory. The course introduces the basic assumptions and concepts underlying the preparation and measurement of financial data related to a business organization. Measurement of business operations, financial reporting, budgeting, cost volume profit analysis, and and product costing are among the subjects to be discussed. Topics relevant to the health care industry will be emphasized. Ethical and global issues are integrated throughout the course along with real world issues.
outcome: Classify transactions and their impact on financial statements., Explain relevant accounting concepts and how they impact financial statements., Analyze cost data for managerial decision making and explain and assess the budget making process., Analyze and present the financial position and results of operations for a business entity., 

class: PUBPOL 5710
class title: Organizational Development and Human Resource Management in Health Care Organization
description: Explores (1) the theoretical foundation of organizational theory, research, and human resource management with an emphasis on implementation; (2) real-world problems while analyzing, exploring, and discussing varied interpretations of selected cases; (3) the building blocks of managerial activity, internal organizational issues, performance issues related to organization design, and strategic issues. Key organizational change and development concepts enhance students' perspectives on how the theories, strategies, and practices relate to today's organizations. The course serves as a framework to establish the theory and the conceptual and competency foundations necessary for applying interventions.
outcome: Understand the theoretical underpinnings of organizational development and change., Critically examine the implications of the theories discussed., Understand the many facets of organizational dynamics and how change impacts stakeholders., Understand the relationship of executive teams, organizational change and organizational design., To understand recruitment and selection and job analysis and design., To know how to manage groups and teams., To understand issues related to sexual harassment and diversity as well as employee and employer rights., Understand the importance of motivating and leading people and groups., To be able to chart the future and evaluate performance of individuals, groups, and processes., Understand the ways in which organizational structure and technology influence how organizations learn and change., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 5570.

class: PUBPOL 5717
class title: Energy Transition: Policy, Financial, and Business Interactions
description: The course utilizes discussions, presentations, research papers, and simulations to explore the policy, financial, and business implications, opportunities, and risks, of climate change, specifically the energy transition to a low-carbon economy. We will explore potential public policies in the context of their business impacts, effectiveness, and political viability. How does different policy design encourage distinct long-term pathways within a highly capital-intensive industry? What industries are most impacted by a transition to a lower carbon economy? How do incentives and structures influence business actors toward a smoother transition, or toward wasted capital expenditures, and stranded assets? Are financial markets pricing in an energy transition?  What is the role of financial and market regulators in ensuring long-term "beneficial" capital allocation? With an industry in decline, what are the business strategy options for management of a fossil fuel producer? What are the policy, financial, and business implications for clean energy firms, electric vehicle manufacturers, and the metals and mining industry? Additional readings, research, and presentations are required of Master's students.
outcome: Students will describe potential impacts of the energy transition and related public policy interactions on business outcomes., Students will explain why market actors' incentives and other structural impediments can impede an effective and smooth transition and may also result in stranded assets and destruction of shareholder value., Students will examine financial and strategic approaches in assessing transition risk, and investor and management decisions-making in a carbon-constrained global economy., Students will explain the catalysts driving the speed and magnitude of the energy transition., 
distribution categories: (SBA-HE)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite:  (PUBPOL 5210 or ECON 3030, or equivalent).

class: PUBPOL 5720
class title: Addiction Medicine Practice and Policy
description: A community-engaged addiction medicine course that draws from experts in the field to address the neurobiology of addiction, risk and protective factors for substance misuse and addiction, barriers to treatment such as stigma, the recovery continuum, and a focus on drug policy and law in historical and contemporary context. Students will complete a community engaged project and field trips will be offered. This course is geared toward future clinicians, policy makers, healthcare leaders, data analysts, and engaged citizens who care about human well being and health equity.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 2300 or PUBPOL 2350 or PUBPOL 3280.

class: PUBPOL 5767
class title: Cybersecurity for Executive Leaders
description: Cybersecurity is continuously evolving, with new threats and vulnerabilities constantly emerging, making the need to be vigilant in security measures and protocols more important than ever. This course will guide students through the regulatory framework that can often feel like a maze of changing requirements and security system updates. They will explore the various risks faced by different industries and examine ways to adopt best practices that enable them to efficiently safeguard against cyber threats and attacks. As students investigate the responsibilities their organization has to ensure cybersecurity, they will recognize it as a team effort and discover how building a cybersecurity culture can be the foundation of their organization's ability to do business safely in today's cyber world.
outcome: Recognize the principal framework that governs cybersecurity., Examine the discretion that is involved within the regulatory framework as it applies to your organization., Discuss how third-party actions as well as your own can impede business objectives.Br, Project changes in an ever-evolving system of operational security practices and prepare to adapt accordingly., Identify threats and vulnerabilities both internal and external to your business., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: enrollment in the Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) Program.

class: PUBPOL 5783
class title: Comparative Health Care Systems
description: This course is designed to make students familiar with comparative health care system analyses. Students learn about basic methodological tools to analyse and compare different health care systems using the example of the U.S. We learn about a unifying framework that allows us to categorize health care systems and benchmark them against each other.
outcome: Use a unified framework to simplify, analyze, and evaluate health care systems., Identify the basic organizational setups of the following health care systems with their various components and interactions: U.S., Germany, Canada, China, Singapore, UK, and others., Apply statistical analysis to OECD indicators in order to benchmark the performance of health care systems. To be able to discuss the limitations, advantages and disadvantages of such statistical comparisons., Develop awareness of the challenges of political reform initiatives and why it is so difficult to fundamentally change existing health care systems. Explain why most health care systems are unique and historically grown., 

class: PUBPOL 5787
class title: Leadership in the Algorithmic Age: AI and Public Policy
description: Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a transformative force in society, impacting various facets of our lives. As AI technologies advance, the need for effective public policy frameworks becomes increasingly critical. This graduate-level course explores the dynamic intersection of AI and public policy, delving into the ethical, regulatory, and practical considerations that shape the development and implementation of policies governing AI. This course also emphasizes the need for proactive development of policies to navigate the challenges and opportunities presented by AI technologies. Through a combination of lectures, readings, discussions, and a practical policy project, students will gain a holistic perspective on the challenges and opportunities presented by AI technologies in society.
outcome: Students will discuss the Foundations of AI and gain a comprehensive understanding of AI technologies, their applications, and the implications for individuals, communities, and societies., Students will examine regulatory landscapes; explore the historical evolution of AI regulation globally, comparing approaches taken by different countries and regions. Analyze challenges and opportunities in regulating rapidly evolving AI technologies., Students will debate privacy and security in the AI Era: Investigate the intricate relationship between AI and privacy, cybersecurity, and data protection. Assess policy responses aimed at safeguarding individual rights and ensuring the security of AI systems., Students will identify opportunities to address bias and fairness: Explore the ethical dimensions of algorithmic bias and fairness in AI decision-making. Evaluate policy strategies and frameworks designed to mitigate bias and promote fairness., 

class: PUBPOL 5823
class title: Disruptive Innovation in Health Care II
description: The goal of this course is to empower students with current, cutting-edge insights on the external threats and opportunities presented by technology and insurgent forces in healthcare, and how "incumbents" can successfully respond to these threats and opportunities in a COVID and post-COVID world. My hope is that you will be inspired to understand and embrace "disruption," and to become an innovator, an influencer, and a force in creating a new and better healthcare world.
outcome: Anticipate the trajectory of insurgents and the response of incumbents to ignore, resist, adopt, co-opt, or compete., Evaluate strategic alternatives for incumbents to minimize the risk of disruption and take advantage of opportunities presented by insurgents., Translate your knowledge into action by proposing a strategic initiative to enable an incumbent to not just survive but to be strengthened and thrive in a changed, "disrupted" healthcare industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUBPOL 5813.

class: PUBPOL 5848
class title: The Fight Against Unemployment: Advocacy and Policy
description: Unemployment is damaging to individuals, families, and society. Governments around the world have attempted to mitigate these harms, in some countries through generous out-of-work benefits, targeted retraining services for job seekers, and disincentives for employers to lay workers off in the first place. But why is unemployment so persistent in capitalist societies? What does it mean for an individual to be unemployed? What can the US learn from other countries to better combat unemployment and reduce its socially damaging effects? Students will work with community partners to assist the unemployed or conduct policy-relevant research.

class: PUBPOL 5853
class title: Digital Transformation for Executives
description: Digital transformation isn't just for tech startups. It's a critical strategic focus area for today's leaders — and an initiative necessary for nearly every organization or venture to compete. In this course, you will learn how to find and produce new, streamlined, and disruptive business ideas through digital auditing and a rapid ideation process.
outcome: Conduct a builder audit to assess product ideation at your organization., Identify opportunities for digital transformation., Use product and service design, business model transformation, and sales transformation templates to generate new ideas., Work daily with a structured format to produce a large number of business ideas., 

class: PUBPOL 5900
class title: Special Topics in Health Administration and Finance
description: A special topics course specifically designed for students in the Sloan Program in Health Administration. Possible multiple offerings using adjunct faculty teaching in areas of expertise not covered in depth in the Sloan core curriculum and relevant to students preparing for careers in health management. Format ranges from intensive courses offered over several full days to longer courses meeting on a weekly basis. Each section represents a separate stand-alone course occurring over the dates indicated.

class: PUBPOL 5910
class title: Master of Public Administration (MPA) Capstone
description: Provides 2nd year MPA students with opportunities to practice skills they've learned in their coursework and professional experiences to address policy or management problems for real-world clients in government or nonprofit agencies in the US. MPA students may use the reports produced in this course to meet the MPA professional writing requirement.

class: PUBPOL 5913
class title: VUCA Leadership for Executives
description: This course is designed to provide students with an opportunity to expand their knowledge and understanding of the key leadership skills required for success in today's volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous business world. It will build on the skills discussed in NCC 5040 Leading Teams and Managing and Leading Organizations, through discussion and interaction with an experienced practitioner and former leader of the United States Army. The course will be comprised of four modules: 1) Leadership Principles for a Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous World; 2) Developing and Communicating Vision and Strategy; 3) Setting Conditions for Success; and, 4) Character and Leadership.
outcome: Assess the four critical dimensions of your operating environment (internal, external, competitive, and relationship) and identify potential vulnerabilities in and opportunities for your organization in each of these areas., Define the elements of an effective business strategy in a VUCA world so you can clearly communicate your own business strategy., Evaluate and describe three ways to build commitment to a common goal and use those techniques to outline a plan that cultivates buy-in from your team or organization., Formulate a plan that specifies how you intend to create or strengthen inclusiveness in your environment and achieve your vision and strategy as a result., 

class: PUBPOL 5920
class title: Public Affairs Externships
description: Combines a professional public affairs externship in a metropolitan area with academic study to provide experience and understanding of the planner's role in formulating and implementing plans and policies. Externships are available in international organizations, federal, state, and local government agencies, legislative offices, and comparable settings include development of research, analysis, and other technical skills.  Weekly seminars draw on student field experiences, assigned readings, and guest speakers to examine current issues of federal, urban, and regional policy from the perspective of public affairs practice.

class: PUBPOL 5923
class title: Service Excellence
description: This course provides students with a framework for critical thinking and techniques that can be adopted by customer-facing employees in any role. It provides tools that can be applied to any situation involving internal or external customers.
outcome: The course will enable students to develop service excellence competencies, practice servant leadership, and deliver and excellent customer experience for their organizations., Foster ethical conduct to promote service excellence., Create a team-centered, collaborative culture., 

class: PUBPOL 5930
class title: Writing Professional Reports for Public Affairs
description: This 7 week seminar course will focus on writing for policy and professional audiences in public affairs. This course is directed toward second-year students in the MPA program who plan to complete a professional report to meet the MPA degree writing requirement. Students will define their research project for a client organization, and develop the professional report proposal, project management workplan, and literature review for their professional report.
outcome: Students will demonstrate research project and proposal development in relation to client organizations, including determining project scope, purposes, objectives, and procedures and alignment with the mission and need of a client organization., Students will develop a prospectus and a literature review for a professional report of relevance to a client organization, as well as demonstrate skills necessary to communicate with a broad audience., Students will present research findings to non-academic audiences through oral and written presentations., 
distribution categories: (KCM-HE, SBA-HE)

class: PUBPOL 5933
class title: Introduction to Driving High Reliability in Healthcare
description: This course is intended to provide future health care leaders core knowledge leading to competencies based on high-reliability principles of operational design and management, team leadership and collaboration within adaptive complex health care environments.
outcome: Demonstrate comprehension of core high reliability principles for application to complex adaptive health care environments., Apply tools and talents within a small team-based activity to demonstrate collaboration and comprehension of high-reliability methods., Evaluate outcome measure methods for appropriate application to scenario-based events requiring post-event failure analysis., 

class: PUBPOL 5940
class title: Consulting for Nonprofit and Government Organizations
description: This class teaches practical skills that will enable students to work with clients in the local community, learn about organizational structure and culture, and gain real-world experience as they complete a public-service project. Students receive instruction on topics such as organizational development, program evaluation, project management, professional communication, and strategic planning. A significant portion of the course will focus on project management.

class: PUBPOL 5943
class title: Negotiation Essentials
description: Negotiation is the art and science of securing an agreement between two or more interdependent parties. A basic premise of the course is that while a manager needs technical and analytical skills in order to develop optimal solutions, a broad array of negotiation skills is needed for these solutions to be accepted and implemented.The course is designed to help you approach negotiations with confidence. You have the opportunity to develop your negotiating skills experientially and to gain insight into what works, what does not, and why.
outcome: Approach negotiations with confidence., Develop your negotiating skills experientially., Gain insight into what works, what does not, and why., 

class: PUBPOL 5949
class title: Systems Thinking, Mapping, and Leadership Practicum I
description: This engaged learning course will connect students to real-world problems in systems thinking, mapping, and leadership.  Students will learn about how to apply a range of cutting-edge tools in systems thinking to a complex problem presented by a public affairs client organization (topics change annually).  Note that this course requires a one-week field component held over winter break that represents .5 credit of the overall course grade.
outcome: Students will apply quantitative and qualitative mixed research methods to an on-the-ground experience utilizing a SysEval tool and the Knowledge Methods Matrix (KMM)., Students will apply systems thinking (ST-DSRP) modeling and leadership concepts to observing, understanding, and analyzing a complex systemic problem set., Students will work with a team to develop and propose a comprehensive 10 year plan for policy and action recommendations to be submitted to local stakeholders and authorities., Students will work with a team to deliver a professional conference presentation (recorded) and publish the results of fieldwork in a journal. Fellows have been accepted to present their findings at the 2020 Cornell Systems Thinking Symposium in April 18-20, 2020 and publish their findings in the Cornell Policy Review., 

class: PUBPOL 5950
class title: Executive Master of Public Administration Capstone
description: Field Studies are the Capstone for Brooks School Executive Master of Public Administration (EMPA) students. The course is designed to act as an integrative experience combining the competencies and knowledge gained during the student's time in the EMPA Program and the experiences gained in employment. The field study allows students to work on a long-term project within their organization that has been identified as relevant to the coursework and important to the organization.

class: PUBPOL 5951
class title: Field Studies in Health Administration and Planning
description: Students interested in developing administrative and program-planning research skills are given an opportunity to evaluate an ongoing phase of health care agency activity in the light of sound administrative practice and principles of good medical care. In planning and carrying out the research, students work closely with a skilled practicing administrator and with members of the faculty.
outcome: Evaluate and explain a specific health care problem or issue in the context of the client organization and its market environment., Research and evaluate the problem tissue using ( but not limited to) up to date and relevant best practices, expert opinions, the research literature, conducting interviews and surveys, data collection, and data analysis., Organize and present (verbally and in written form) a comprehensive, cohesive, understandable, documented and meaningful report of their project including the group's objectives, methods, findings, and recommendations., Demonstrate a critical understanding of their work and be able to provide alternative solutions/recommendations and innovative approaches., Please the client and be professional at all times., 

class: PUBPOL 5953
class title: Health Managers Practicum
description: The course is the first half of the integrative capstone experience combining the competencies and knowledge gained during the first three semesters of the students' time at Sloan and the experiences gained in employment. In part 1 of this course, students work with their managers, capstone faculty, and Executives-In-Residence to identify a performance improvement project, strategy implementation project, or business development project that is of high importance to their organization. Students define the problem, research best practices, and trial solutions. Students present their preliminary findings and how they applied their coursework to their field study while on campus.
outcome: Demonstrate the ability to apply text, classroom, and career learning to real-life organizational problems., Demonstrate oral presentation and dialogue skills., Demonstrate written communication skills., Demonstrate critical, creative, and reflective thinking (analysis, synthesis, and evaluation skills), providing the client (their organization) with a reasonable solution., 

class: PUBPOL 5954
class title: Health Managers Practicum, Part II
description: The course is the second half of the integrative capstone experience combining the competencies and knowledge gained during the last two semesters of the students' time at Sloan and the experiences gained in employment. In part two of this course, students track and analyze their data, perform a financial analysis, and present their findings.
outcome: Communicate effectively through oral presentation and dialogue skills., Write effectively and clearly., Develop compelling solutions for a client organization by conducting critical, creative, and reflective thinking., Demonstrate critical, creative, and reflective thinking (analysis, synthesis, and evaluation skills), providing the client (their organization) with a reasonable solution., 

class: PUBPOL 5960
class title: State Policy and Advocacy Clinic I
description: We will learn how to design and advocate for specific state-level public policies by practicing these skills before the legislative and administrative branches of the State of New York. In consultation with the professor, student teams will design public policy proposals based on a review of the academic, governmental and think tank literature; conversations with subject matter experts at Cornell and various NGOs; research and analysis of similar proposals in other states and countries; conversations with state and local policymakers; and discussions with community members and organizations, including community partners with lived experience.  Although we will engage in policy design and advocacy primarily in New York State, we will also provide research and policy design services to stakeholders in other states, especially when a comparative or multi-state approach offers strategic benefits.
outcome: Develop a strong understanding of state and local politics in New York, the extent to which legislative and administrative institutions and machinery mold political choices, and the extent to which political considerations influence the menu of viable policy choices. Build a theoretical and practical understanding of legislative and administrative process in New York and other states., Develop a strong understanding of state and local politics in New York, the extent to which legislative and administrative institutions and machinery mold political choices, and the extent to which political considerations influence the menu of viable policy choices., Develop the legal research and reasoning skills needed to engage in comparative state policy analysis; develop a basic understanding of state and federal constitutional constraints on legislative and administrative decision-making., Develop the policy research, design and reasoning skills needed to design and evaluate various policy alternatives. Gain an introduction to basic legislative or regulatory drafting skills., Design, in teams, a creative, compelling, and politically viable state legislative, or administrative solution to a pressing public policy challenge, based on a review of the academic, government and think tank literature, comparative state and country policy research, discussions with subject matter experts, and conversations with community partners and leaders, including community members with lived experience., 

class: PUBPOL 5990
class title: Challenges and Trends in the Health Services Industry
description: Provides students with information and exposure to current and emerging issues in the health services industry. Topics may include financial management of health care facilities, human resource management, information systems, cost-effective clinical decision making, quality measurement and outcomes, public health, and entrepreneurship in the health services industry.
outcome: Students will gain familiarity with different aspects of the health care industry and how they relate to each other, and with management challenges faced by leaders in various areas and their approaches to these challenges. Examples of topics include management challenges in health care consulting, hospital operations, health care finance, information systems and health policy., Students will develop an understanding of potential career paths in the health care industry., Students will develop networking and communication skills to facilitate their personal and professional growth and begin to learn to manage the professional social environment typical of the health care industry, including skills in resume writing and interviewing., 

class: PUBPOL 6000
class title: Special Problems for Graduate Students
description: Independent advanced study by graduate students recommended by their chair or advisor and approved by the program director and the instructor.

class: PUBPOL 6040
class title: Qualitative, Survey, and Mixed Method Approaches to Policy Research
description: Introduces students to theories and methods of data collection techniques such as in-depth interviews, ethnography, focus groups, and surveys as well as mixed-method approaches used in policy and evaluation research. Addresses the strengths and weaknesses of various methods and the design of qualitative and mixed-method studies. Covers epistemology, ethics, induction and deduction, measurement, validity, and triangulation. Also discusses more concrete issues such as gaining access to a field site, developing a qualitative interview guide and survey questionnaire, conducting a qualitative interview, managing data, and assessing data quality.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: previous course in social science research methods.

class: PUBPOL 6060
class title: Demographic Techniques
description: This is the second course in the demographic techniques sequence. It has two foci. First, we will learn the basics of constructing single and multiple decrement life tables, along with extensions to cause-deleted life tables. Second, we will learn the basics of survival analysis, as well as how survival analysis relates to life tables. Although the primary goal is learning to use these techniques, this class also has a heavy emphasis on thinking about how to use these methods to produce something new and important for research. The grad students will also be asked to complete a 10 page research proposal.
outcome: Demonstrate how to build a life table using various methods and understand the connections between life tables and survival analysis., Think creatively about how to use these methods and existing data to make a novel research contribution., Write clearly about what the results from life tables can tell us about demographic processes., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: statistics.

class: PUBPOL 6090
class title: Empirical Strategies for Policy Analysis
description: Focuses on empirical strategies to identify the causal effects of public policies and programs. The course uses problem sets based on real-world examples and data to examine techniques for analyzing nonexperimental data including control function approaches, matching methods, panel-data methods, selection models, instrumental variables, and regression-discontinuity methods. The emphasis throughout, however, is on the critical role of research design in facilitating credible causal inference. The course aids students in both learning to implement a variety of statistical tools using large data sets, and in learning to select which tools are best suited to a given research project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: graduate course in econometrics (e.g., ILRLE 7490 or AEM 7100).

class: PUBPOL 6210
class title: Seminar in Education Policy
description: The course provides an overview of key concepts and current issues in education, drawing on theoretical and empirical research in the field. Includes reading and discussion of academic literature on various topics: purpose and contemporary aims of education, school spending and accountability, school choice and competition, early childhood education.
outcome: Outline and discuss the main concepts, theories and models in education., Critically evaluate empirical research and identify the main empirical issues in education., Apply empirical methods to education policy-related issues., Develop strategies for communicating, collaborating, and critiquing., Further your writing skills and practice writing about research., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PhD level courses on microeconomics and econometrics.

class: PUBPOL 6390
class title: Microeconomics for Policy Analysis
description: This comprehensive course covers microeconomic theory and its application to public policy analysis. Topics addressed include consumer decision-making, the theory of the firm, general equilibrium, welfare economics, monopolies and oligopolies, strategy, and market imperfections.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: calculus and intermediate microeconomics.

class: PUBPOL 6810
class title: Demography Training Seminar
description: CPC's weekly training seminar provides training and professional development to graduate students in demography and serves as a requirement for the graduate demography minor. Includes workshops and presentations of completed papers and work in progress by faculty members, advanced graduate students, and external speakers.
outcome: Critically evaluate presentations of research in various areas of demography., Analyze the strengths and weaknesses of data sets and methods of data analysis., Develop knowledge of demography's substantive and methodological breadth., Develop professional skills, e.g., working collaboratively with faculty and peers; effectively communicating research results; preparing for the job market., 

class: PUBPOL 6900
class title: Professional Seminar in Public Policy
description: This course consists of an introduction to policy research and the PhD program for graduate students. Enrolled students will become familiar with: a) current topics in policy research, b) resources and opportunities available for research in public policy and at Cornell more broadly, and c) best practices for success in graduate school.
outcome: Define current topics in policy research., Utilize resources and opportunities available for research in public policy and at Cornell more broadly., Demonstrate best practices for success in graduate school., 

class: PUBPOL 6971
class title: Topics in Public Finance and Behavioral Economics
description: In this course, we will cover topics in public finance and explore how behavioral economics has influenced our thinking and analysis of major questions in the field. We will focus on reading and discussing important papers, as well as building an experimental toolkit. The goal of the course is to identify open questions at the research frontier and to develop new research ideas.
outcome: Identify key concepts in public finance and behavioral economics recalling the main theories, models, and empirical findings discussed in class and readings., Critically evaluate the contribution of specific papers to the literature, including assessing the validity of their methodologies and the robustness of their findings., Develop original research questions that address gaps or open questions in the field of public finance or behavioral economics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students must pass the micro and econometrics qualifying exams in economics, OR be a PUBPOL/AEM Ph.D. student in good academic standing.

class: PUBPOL 8990
class title: Master's Thesis and Research
description: Students conduct independent master's thesis research under the supervision of a public policy faculty member.

class: PUBPOL 9990
class title: Doctoral Thesis and Research
description: Students conduct independent doctoral thesis research under the supervision of a public policy faculty member.

class: PUNJB 1121
class title: Elementary Punjabi I
description: This course introduces students to Punjabi, a major language of northern India and Pakistan. Beginning with the study of the Gurmukhi script, the course offers an intensive study of the speaking, reading, and writing of the language. This is approached through the theme-based syllabus, a discussion in small groups and paired activities on the cultural background of Punjab and Punjabi culture.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: for beginners or those placed in course by examination.

class: PUNJB 2201
class title: Intermediate Punjabi I
description: Further develops students' skills in Punjabi, a major language of northern India and Pakistan. Continuing with the study of the Gurmukhi script, the course offers an intensive study of the speaking, reading, and writing of the language. This is approached through the theme-based syllabus, a discussion in small groups and paired activities on the cultural background of Punjab and Punjabi culture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: PUNJB 1121 - PUNJB 1122 or equivalent.

class: PUNJB 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Punjabi
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: QUECH 1210
class title: Elementary Quechua I
description: 1210-1220 is an introductory sequence that allows students to develop basic fluency in Quechua, the most widely spoken indigenous language in the Americas. Students learn elements of Quechua's phonetics, vocabulary, morphology and syntax through an interactive approach and gain awareness of regional and dialectal differences. The course focuses on oral and written skills, with emphasis on tasks based on familiar contexts of use. It also introduces learners to the history, culture and geography of the Andes through exposure to cultural practices, proverbs, folklore, and artefacts of the region (e.g. textiles). Students will reflect on Quechua as an endangered language and on the significance of keeping this very popular indigenous language of Latin America alive.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: REAL 5370
class title: Real Estate Seminar Series
description: Designed to bring students weekly into direct contact with real-estate professionals mainly through the use of videoconferences originating from locations around the world.

class: REAL 5560
class title: Creating the Built Environment
description: Real estate professionals and city and regional planners play a vital role in creating the built environment. Understanding the physical form of real estate, and the rules that govern that form, is critically important if one is to meaningfully engage in the practice of real estate development. In this course, we examine in detail the physical form of the built environment, and students gain an understanding of the principles and organizing strategies that underlie it. We examine the following building types in depth: residential, retail, hotel and mixed use. Students exit this course with a deeper understanding of why the built environment takes the shape it does and the opportunities for innovations.

class: REAL 5561
class title: Innovation and Strategy in Commercial Real Estate Development
description: In this course, we will examine in detail the physical form of workplace design and the specific principles and organizing strategies that affect it. We address the history of office building design, current trends in workplace culture and new forms of office space. We discuss issues affecting office building design, including environmental sustainability, building efficiency, building code and construction, and leasing and operations. Students exit the course with a deeper understanding of why the built environment takes the shape it does and the opportunities for innovation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CRP 5560.

class: REAL 5950
class title: Construction Planning and Operations
description: Prepares students for responsibilities in overseeing the engineering and management of construction; on time-on budget. Emphasis is placed on the management processes for organizing, planning, and controlling the activities of complex development and construction programs. Students study the contracts for engineering, architecture, and construction; focusing on cost estimation and schedule control, responsibilities and risks, and the relationships among owners, designers, contractors, and suppliers. The potential for project disruption is discussed with special emphasis on dispute resolution methods.
outcome: Evaluate the client's conceptual design providing broad, yet accurate cost appraisals., Have a thorough understanding of the interactions and relationships among the participants within the construction process., Prepare a comprehensive construction cost estimate for a complex building, including general construction, and specialty contractors.  Develop an understanding of how this estimate is developed and carried forward into the bidding and cost control processes., Develop a project schedule from this cost estimate to determine the overall project duration and critical path., Confidentially advise a project owner of project delivery options in an ethical and effective manner., 

class: REAL 6101
class title: The Economics of Urban Real Estate Markets and the Built Environment
description: This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of the economics of urban real estate markets and the built environment. This will include links between market drivers of property use and value, durability of buildings and infrastructure, finance, and social policy. The course begins with analysis of the 2007 housing market crash and the financial crisis it precipitated. Spatial patterns of development and real estate values are then considered, including patterns extending out from city centers, moving up high in tall commercial buildings, and differences across metropolitan areas. The course concludes with assessment of how new strategies to facilitate urban transportation along with work-from-home have potential to threaten central city office markets and affect patterns of development in cities.
outcome: Apply the tools of supply and demand to explain spatial patterns of land use and value., Explain drivers of volatility in real estate markets and assess the potential for mispricing., Explain why cities typically have expensive housing and commercial space., Assess how different strategies to facilitate urban travel along with work-from-home may affect office markets and patterns of development in cities., 

class: REAL 6230
class title: Real Estate Statistical Modeling
description: This course provides students with education in the use of statistical methods applied to real estate property and market data for the purpose of making informed decisions about allocations of resources to real estate. Both elementary and advanced statistical methods are covered in the course and students receive training in the statistical functions of Excel, STATA, and @RISK. Also, students gain exposure to the expanding number of real estate data bases offered by vendors. An important component of the course is the series of required assignments that involve finding answers to specific questions encountered in practice that can be best answered with statistical analysis of relevant data. Building statistics-based forecasting and valuation models is essential for completing the course assignments.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HADM 2221, HADM 3210, HADM 4200, or HADM 6200.

class: REAL 6580
class title: Residential and Commercial Development
description: Explores the residential and commercial-development process from site acquisition through delivery of the finished product. Topics include market feasibility, land planning and acquisition, product selection and design, project financing and feasibility, schedule and budgetary controls, contracting and construction, marketing, and sales activities. Composition of the development project team is discussed. Classes are supplemented by visiting professionals. The course includes a semester-long project based on an actual property and market opportunity.

class: REAL 6595
class title: Special Topics in Real Estate
description: This course addresses pertinent issues relative to real estate.  Topics vary each semester.

class: REAL 6640
class title: Management Communication
description: The purpose of this course is to improve writing and speaking skills as applied in the real estate industry contexts and practices. Students learn to think critically and strategically about communication, to produce messages that are clear, concise, efficient, and effective. Students will have opportunities to practice effective communication elements in a variety of genres, ranging from shorter messages to complex reports and decks, as well as persuasive speeches. More specifically, students will learn how to adjust their communication choices when communicating in different written and oral genres typical in real estate situations. Overall, the goal is to make students' communications clearer, succinct, efficient, effective, and persuasive. Students are evaluated on the communication skills that they will regularly demonstrate through class activities, discussions, preparation, etc.
outcome: Understand the main principles of successful business communication and persuasion and apply them to a variety of oral and written RE communication situations., Make strategic decisions regarding communication channel, content, organization, tone, style, and so forth, to effectively influence specific audiences., Design and deliver complex communication genres, such as reading decks and investment pitches, which require a combination of successful individual and group communications., 

class: REAL 6990
class title: Graduate Real Estate Independent Study
description: Independent study project as agreed to by instructor and student.

class: RELST 2060
class title: Introduction to Africana Religions
description: This course explores the history of religions among people of African descent from the period of the development of the transatlantic slave trade (1440s) to the present. Its aim is to introduce students to the complex ways religion has shaped their lifeworlds. Such study involves, among other things, encounters with the religious cultures of slaves and slaveholders in the antebellum South; the development of independent Black churches, the effects of emancipation, migration, and urbanization upon Black religious life; new black religious movements (e.g., Nation of Islam, Father Divine's Peace Mission Movement, Black Hebrews); the emergence of Black secularism/humanism; the impact of Black religious expressive culture (e.g., music, sermon, song, and film); the religious dimensions of the Civil Rights and Black Power movements; as well as contemporary developments and transformations in Black religious life. All of which requires attentiveness to how we tell the story of Africana religions, and how scholars have developed and pursued the modern study of "Africana religion." 
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: RELST 2273
class title: Religion and Ecological Sustainability
description: This course introduces the academic study of religion. This course serves as both an introduction to the academic study of religion and a survey of major topics in the intersections of religious communities and environmentally sustainable practices. Using real cases of environmentally sustainable, religiously oriented communities, we explore how myth, ritual, symbols, doctrines, and ideologies of time and space are activated in practical living decisions. This class involves readings of both primary sources, poetry and literature, secondary sources, films and site visits.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, KCM-AG)

class: RELST 2279
class title: Chinese Mythology
description: Students will study Chinese myths from the earliest times. Focus will be on understanding how people have used myth to create and convey meaning, on examining the form Chinese myths take, and on considering how they are related to religion, literature, historical accounts, and intellectual trends.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 2299
class title: Buddhism
description: This course will explore the Buddhist tradition from its origins in ancient India to its migrations throughout Asia and eventually to the West. The first part of the course will deal with Indian Buddhism: the Buddha, the principal teachings and practices of his early followers, and new developments in spiritual orientation. We will then turn to the transmission of Buddhism to Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, where at least one of the early schools has been preserved. Next we will look at Mahayana Buddhism as it moves north and east, encompassing China, Japan, and Tibet. While much of the course will be devoted to developments in traditional times, we will also look at some of the ways Buddhist cultures have responded to modernity.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG)

class: RELST 2599
class title: Medicine, Magic and Science in the Ancient Near East
description: This course explores the history of medicine and other sciences in the ancient Near East, broadly defined. In addition to medicine, the other scientific disciplines covered in this course include mathematics, astrology, astronomy, alchemy, zoology, among others. Geographically, the course traces the transmission of scientific knowledge in ancient Babylonia, Iran, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, and beyond. As such, the course offers students a tour of different ancient civilizations and corpora. Students read selections from cuneiform Akkadian tablets, Egyptian Christian Coptic spellbooks, rabbinic sources such as the Talmud, among many other works. At the same time, students will be required to critically engage recent scholarship in the history of science and medicine as a way to help frame their analyses of the ancient materials. The course interrogates how ancient civilizations transmitted and received scientific knowledge, as well as the relationship between what we today tend to call science, medicine, magic, and religion. This course is intended not only for students in the Humanities and Social Sciences, but also for those majoring in science or medicine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: RELST 2627
class title: Introduction to Islam
description: This course is an introduction to the study of Islam and Islamic history. Organised historically, the lecture series will begin with the career of the Prophet Muhammad, before charting the course of the Islamic Conquests, the establishment, zenith and collapse of various Islamic Empires, ending with European colonialism. Along the way, this geopolitical and historical overview will provide a backdrop to our exploration of changes and developments in Islamic thought and practice. In particular, we will focus on the emergence of the Sunni-Shi'i conflict, the rise of Sufism and Salafism, as well as how scholars across time and space thought and wrote about questions of ideal Islamic governance, the religious authority of the caliph, women's role in society and public space, slavery, the ethics of living under non-Muslim rule and the place of non-Muslims in Islamic society.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: RELST 2724
class title: The Jewish Bible-Old Testament in Context
description: The Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) is a repository of ancient Israelite religious, political, social, historical, and literary traditions. For the modern reader these ancient traditions are often obscured by a focus on the text as revelation. The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the biblical world by reading the Hebrew Bible in translation, on its own terms, as a body of literature that evolved in an ancient Near Eastern context. The Bible itself will be the primary text for the course, but students will also be exposed to the rich and diverse textual traditions of the ancient Near East, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, Moab, and Ugarit. In addition, this course will explore the impact of early biblical interpretation on shaping the monotheistic traditions inherited in the West. As participants in a secular course on the Bible, students will be challenged to question certain cultural assumptions about the composition and authorship of the Bible, and will be expected to differentiate between a text's content and its presumed meaning.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 2852
class title: Judaism and the Origins of Christianity
description: Most people think of Christianity as the "daughter religion" of Judaism. In this course, we will see that what we now know as Judaism and Christianity both claimed ownership of the same textual tradition and emerged together from the same set of historical circumstances, shaped by political crisis, a radical transformation of the social order and the challenge of Graeco-Roman culture. Through close reading of the principal sources of Christian literature, such as Paul's letters to the first communities of gentile "believers" and the accounts of the life and death of the messiah, known collectively as the gospels, we will explore how and why the followers of Jesus first came to think of themselves as the "New Israel" and how a polemical engagement with their controversial interpretation of Hebrew prophecy shaped the development of the rabbinic movement in Roman Palestine.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: RELST 3060
class title: Emotions, Religion, and Race
description: This course explores past and contemporary theories of emotions and different kinds of emotions like wonder, grief, anger, and fear, all with an eye toward the study and practice of religion, and its relationship to race, gender, class, and politics. We will also explore how the academic study of religion and different religious tradition impact our understanding of emotions. We will draw from philosophy, anthropology, sociology, literature, political science, affect theory, gender studies, psychology, and neuroscience. We will examine several questions related to emotions and its rise. First and foremost, what is an emotion? How is it different from affect, feeling, or passion? How are emotions investigated across disciplines?  Can we study emotion historically? How are certain emotions racialized or gendered? What is a religious experience? How identifying as religious or otherwise impact one's understanding and experience of emotions? How do emotions lend force to ideas and ideologies, to causes such as the recent surge of White (Christian) nationalist sentiment in the U.S. and other countries? Finally, what do emotions (and affect theory) bring to the study of religion?
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: RELST 3320
class title: Buddhist Meditation Traditions
description: This course will examine both the practice of and the ideology surrounding forms of meditation in Buddhist traditions from South, Southeast, and East Asia in premodern and contemporary times. We will explore early canonical accounts of the practice as well as later formulations that emerged as central foci of specific sectarian traditions. We will also discuss some modern scientific explorations of meditation practice and its increasing role as a psychotherapeutic tool.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 3322
class title: Gospel and The Blues: A Black Women's History I, 1900-1973
description: In her pathbreaking text Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval Saidiya Hartman writes that "young Black women were radical thinkers who tirelessly imagined other ways to live and never failed to consider how the world might be otherwise." This two-semester course endeavors to travel through those worlds using the cultural and musical forms of gospel and the blues as our compass. The first semester is guided by the work of scholars and writers like Angela Davis, Hazel Carby, Alice Walker, and Gayl Jones and artists like Ethel Waters, Bessie Smith, Victoria Spivey, and Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Together we will interrogate the spectrum of lived experiences making for a kaleidoscopic sonic history of joy, pleasure, sorrow, resistance, and everything in between.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 3539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: RELST 3720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground.  We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 3787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 4100
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: RELST 4196
class title: From the Bible to the Museum: Jewish Memory and Public History
description: How has the remembrance of the past shaped the evolution of Jewish religion, identity, and culture from Biblical times to the present? How have the creation, dissemination, and preservation of Jewish memory changed over time? How is Jewish history used in political discourse in contemporary society in the U.S. and around the Globe? How can the historical tools be utilized to generate a sophisticated and discerning public engagement with the complexities of the Jewish past? In this course, students will explore these questions through seminar discussions, attending, evaluating, and critiquing exhibits and cultural events and watching films that put Jewish history on display, and by deploying their own research, writing, and creative skills to produce public facing final projects or a traditional research paper.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 4256
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: An introduction to belief systems in ancient Mexico and Central America, emphasizing the blending of religion, astrology, myth, history, and prophecy. Interpreting text and image in pre-Columbian books and inscriptions is a major focus.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RELST 4990
class title: Directed Study
description: For undergraduates who wish to obtain research experience or do extensive reading on a special topic. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course.

class: RELST 4995
class title: Senior Honors Essay I
description: RELST 4995 is the first course in the Honors two-part sequence. The Honors Program is open to Religious Studies majors who have done superior work and who wish to devote a substantial part of their senior year to advanced, specialized, independent research and writing of a thesis. Successfully completing an honors thesis will require sustained interest, exceptional ability, diligence, and enthusiasm. While admissions to the Honors Program and completion of a thesis do not guarantee that students will be awarded honors in Religious Studies, most students find the experience as intellectually rewarding as it is rigorous.

class: RELST 6020
class title: Latin Philosophical Texts
description: Reading and translation of Latin philosophical texts.

class: RELST 6284
class title: Culture, Religion, and Politics
description: What types of political outcomes can religion and culture help explain? What political and social factors affect religious identity and institutions? This course is designed to provide graduate students with an overview of theoretical approaches to the study of religion and culture in the social sciences. This course has three objectives. First, students will be able to identify traditional ways in which religion and culture have been theorized and operationalized in political science. Second, students will use empirical evidence to evaluate these theories and measurement strategies and assess potential threats to inference. Finally, students will complete their own research project on the relationship between politics and religion.

class: RELST 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: RELST 6720
class title: Women and Gender in Biblical Israel
description: This course focuses on how Biblical texts represent women in ancient Israel, and how the Bible's representations constitute both a fabrication and a manifestation of social life on the ground. We will use biblical, archaeological, and ancient Near Eastern textual evidence to consider the complicated relationship between ancient society and the textual and material records from which we reconstruct it. In addition, this course will examine how women's roles in the Hebrew Bible have been understood and integrated in later Jewish and Christian thought, and how these discourses shape contemporary American attitudes towards women, sexuality, and gender. 

class: RELST 6787
class title: Interpreting the Qur'an
description: The Qur'an is a cornucopia of stories, laws, apocalyptic visions, Paradisical landscapes and stark warnings. This course presents students with the opportunity not only to read the Qur'an in translation in its entirety, but also to explore different ways in which the Qur'anic text has been and can be interpreted, and the different religious, social and ethical questions that derive from different methods of interpretation. Across the course, students will be asked to explore questions, such as: how does dating the Qur'an impact interpretation? How does the debate concerning Qur'anic (un)createdness impact its interpretation? Is it possible to use extra-Qur'anic material to interpret the Qur'an? How can the Qur'an be read as a literary text? Or as a source of law? Or as a source for history? What is the Qur'an's own view of the past, present and future? How do feminist and queer Muslims read and interpret the Qur'an? This course is secular and academic in nature. We will study a wide range of religious and secular/academic approaches to interpreting the Qur'an, some of which may challenge widely-held assumptions about the Qur'an's authorship, dating, composition and interpretation.

class: RELST 7250
class title: Time and History in Ancient Mexico
description: Explores the ways Mesoamericans understood the world and their place in it, and the ways they constructed history as these are reflected in the few books that have survived from the period before the European invasion. Examines the structure of writing and systems of notation, especially calendars, and considers their potential for illuminating Mesoamerican world views and approaches to history. Primary focus is detailed analysis of five precolumbian books: Codex Borgia, a central Mexican manual of divinatory ritual; Codex Boturini, a history of migration in central Mexico; Codex Nuttall, a Mixtec dynastic history; and two Maya books of astrology and divination, Codex Dresden and Codex Madrid.

class: ROMS 1102
class title: FWS: The Craft of Storytelling
description: We tell stories for many reasons: to entertain; to seduce; to complain; to think. This course draws upon the literatures and cultures of the romance languages to explore the role of narrative in our construction and understanding of the world.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 1108
class title: FWS:Cultural Identities; Cultural Differences
description: What is a culture, and how do we know one when we see it?  This course draws upon the histories and texts of French, Spanish, Italian, and/or Portuguese speaking worlds to discuss issues of identity, difference, politics, place, and community.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 1109
class title: FWS: Image and Imagination
description: What kind of information do images - in photography, painting, and/or film - convey?  What kind of impact do they have on the minds and the bodies of their audiences?  This course foregrounds the role of visual culture in the societies where Spanish, French, Portuguese, and/or Italian is spoken, and it asks students to dwell upon how visual material interacts with spoken and written language.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 1113
class title: FWS: Thinking and Thought
description: Some of the most important and intriguing thinkers, from the Middle Ages to postmodernity, have done their thinking in the romance languages.  This course explores a body of work that would be called philosophical by some, theoretical by others, and that, beyond these names, struggles to articulate fundamental concepts, problems, discourses, and situations.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 1114
class title: FWS: Semiotics
description: What allows us to make assumptions about people based on the way they speak or dress? How can we understand the deeper meaning of a fairy tale or an episode of The Simpsons? What does macaroni and cheese mean, and why is it not on the menu at most upscale Manhattan eateries? This seminar introduces semiotics, the study of signs and the meaning-bearing sign systems they form; sign systems that include not only human language but also literature, painting, sculpture, film, music, dance and also such aspects of popular culture as advertising, fashion, food, and television, to name just a few. The diversity of semiotic systems provides many possibilities for thinking and writing critically about the world we live in.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 1120
class title: FWS: Animals in Global Cinema
description: In this class, students will learn about animal welfare and conservation through international films. We will discuss wildlife, companion, farm, and lab animals in conjunction with human cultures, politics, and geography. The course will cover various animal species in fiction films, documentaries, and animated movies. In some motion pictures, animals will be central, in other more peripheral. Students will learn how to compose a film review, assess sources, and write a critical essay. The class includes guest speakers and a field trip to Cornell Teaching &amp; Research Barns. All films are digital for students to watch in their free time
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: ROMS 3115
class title: Video and New Media: Art, Theory, Politics
description: The course will offer an overview of video art, alternative documentary video, and digital installation and networked art. It will analyze four phases of video and new media: (1) the development of video from its earliest turn away from television; (2) video's relation to art and installation; (3) video's migration into digital art; (4) the relation of video and new media to visual theory and social movements. Screenings will include early political and feminist video (Ant Farm, Rosler, Paper Tiger TV, Jones), conceptual video of the '80s and '90s (Vasulka, Lucier, Viola, Hill), gay and multicultural video of the '90s (Muntadas, Riggs, Piper, Fung, Parmar), networked and activist new media of the 21st century (Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, SubRosa, Preemptive Media). Secondary theoretical readings on postmodernism, video theory, multicultural theory, and digital culture will provide students with a cultural and political context for the discussion of video and new media style, dissemination, and reception.

class: ROMS 3560
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: ROMS 4650
class title: Revolution: An Intellectual History
description: For more than two centuries, revolutions have marked the rhythm of modernity. In 1780, the original meaning of revolution - an astronomical rotation - was transformed in order to apprehend a social and political overthrow. This course will investigate the multiple uses of this crucial concept of political theory, from the revolutionary canon (Blanqui, Marx, Fanon...) to the classics of conservatism (Maistre, Cortés, Schmitt...), which depict contemporary history as a conflict between revolutions and counter-revolutions, socialist and fascist revolutions. We will explore the connections between history and theory, and stress the global dimension of revolutions, forged by a permanent transfer of ideas and people from one continent to another.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: ROMS 5080
class title: Pedagogy Practicum
description: This practicum is designed to better enable the TAs to meet the needs of their students in the understanding and acquisition of the linguistic forms, notions, and functions covered in their course.

class: ROMS 6100
class title: Romance Studies Colloquium
description: Designed to give insight into how to formulate projects, conduct research, and publish one's work, the colloquium offers a venue for faculty-graduate student dialogue in a collegial, intellectual setting.  Meetings are biweekly, 2-3 hours, and are open to all students and faculty in Romance Studies, but required for first year students in the program.  Each meeting, two faculty members will be invited to discuss their scholarship and also a short text of their choice, to be distributed beforehand.

class: ROMS 6224
class title: Beauty, Grief
description: This course is for anyone drawn to beauty-and anyone who, within the beautiful, finds the trace of a loss. What do we grieve, what do we miss, when we find ourselves in the presence of beauty? And what, in every retrospective, prospective or otherwise non-present beauty, do we nonetheless crave and nonetheless mourn? What is the beauty hidden within mourning? We'll take a look at thinkers, poets, and artists from both modern and premodern culture, potentially including Anne Carson, Augustine of Hippo, Fra Angelico, Gillian Rose, Hervé Guibert, Pepe Espáliu, and others, as we try to sit with dual summons of beauty and grief: beauty or grief.

class: ROMS 6324
class title: Writing for the Public: Adapting Academic Work for a General Audience
description: This workshop-style course will address the question of how to draw on academic research and expertise to write for a non-specialist audience. We will discuss the benefits of public-facing writing; how to select a publication to pitch; how to pitch an article; and how to draft and revise an article once a pitch has been accepted. These skills will be developed through practice. Students will develop real pitch ideas to use as a basis for articles that will be drafted and revised over the course of the semester. We will discuss questions such as selecting appropriate venues, adapting to a new writing style, sourcing, citation practices, and communicating with editors.

class: ROMS 6650
class title: Revolution: An Intellectual History
description: For more than two centuries, revolutions have marked the rhythm of modernity. In 1780, the original meaning of revolution - an astronomical rotation - was transformed in order to apprehend a social and political overthrow. This course will investigate the multiple uses of this crucial concept of political theory, from the revolutionary canon (Blanqui, Marx, Fanon...) to the classics of conservatism (Maistre, Cortés, Schmitt...), which depict contemporary history as a conflict between revolutions and counter-revolutions, socialist and fascist revolutions. We will explore the connections between history and theory, and stress the global dimension of revolutions, forged by a permanent transfer of ideas and people from one continent to another.

class: RUSSA 1103
class title: Conversation Practice
description: Reinforces the speaking skills learned in RUSSA 1121. Homework includes assignments that must be done in the language lab or on the students' own computer. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: RUSSA 1121.

class: RUSSA 1121
class title: Elementary Russian through Film
description: Gives a thorough grounding in all the language skills; listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Course materials include clips from original Russian films and televisions programs. Homework includes assignments that must be done in the language lab or on the students' own computers. Note the RUSSA 1103 option. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: RUSSA 1125
class title: Reading Russian Press
description: The emphasis is on reading unabridged articles on a variety of topics from current Russian web pages and translating them into English; a certain amount of discussion (in Russian) may also be undertaken. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: for seminar 101 (non-native speakers of Russian), RUSSA 1122 or placement by department; for seminar 102 (native speakers of Russian), placement by department.

class: RUSSA 1131
class title: Self-Paced Elementary Russian I
description: RUSSA 1131 and RUSSA 1132 cover the standard Cornell first-year Russian language curriculum at a slower pace than RUSSA 1103 -RUSSA 1104 and RUSSA 1121 -RUSSA 1122, the pace to be chosen by each individual student in consultation with the instructor. Somewhat larger homework reading, writing, and online assignments with fewer and shorter meetings with the instructors in very small groups. Detailed description at Russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: RUSSA 2203
class title: Intermediate Composition and Conversation
description: Guided conversation, translation, reading, pronunciation, and grammar review, emphasizing the development of accurate and idiomatic expression in the language. Course materials include video clips from an original Russian feature film and work with Russian web sites, in addition to the textbook. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: RUSSA 1122 and RUSSA 1104, or RUSSA 1122 with grade higher than B, or placement by department after completing RUSSA 1132 or studying Russian elsewhere.

class: RUSSA 3300
class title: Directed Studies
description: Taught on a specialized basis for students with special projects (e.g., to supplement a non-language course or thesis work).

class: RUSSA 3305
class title: Reading and Writing for Heritage Speakers of Russian
description: Intended for students who speak grammatically correct Russian but do not know Russian grammar and have not learned to read or write Russian well (or have not learned written Russian at all). May be taught slightly faster or slower in a given year, depending on the needs and interests of the students. Two classes a week teach writing and grammar and include related reading. These classes are required, and the students who take them receive 2 credit hours. The third (optional) class teaches reading and discussion, and grants an additional credit hour. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: placement by department.

class: RUSSA 4413
class title: Modern Russia: Past and Present I
description: Involves discussion, in Russian, of authentic Russian texts and films (feature or documentary) in a variety of non-literary styles and genres. Detailed description at russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: RUSSA 3304 or equivalent.

class: RUSSA 4433
class title: Russian for Russian Specialists
description: The course is designed for advanced students of Russian who are interested in Russian studies requiring fine active control of the language. Students will have an opportunity to speak formally and informally on topics in their field of interest. Fine points of syntax, usage, and style will be discussed. The subject matter differs from year to year. Detailed description at Russian.cornell.edu.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: four years of college Russian or equivalent.

class: RUSSL 2001
class title: Russian Jews and Jewish Russians in Literature and Film
description: Explore the ways of 19th to 21st century Russian Jewry through survey of literature and film. Learn about life in Russia from the perspective of Jewish and Russian-Jewish writers as well as through portrayal of Russian Jews in works of prominent Russian authors in the context of period. Selected works of Pushkin and Chekhov, Gogol and Sholom Aleichem, Pasternak and Yevtushenko will help create a multidimensional picture of the political and socio-cultural environment in which processes of integration and assimilation, both imposed and impeded by the state, shaped the identity of the modern-day Russian Jews in their deep, inherent connection to the Russian culture and often complicated relationship with their roots, which characteristically distinguishes them from their American contemporaries.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: RUSSL 4492
class title: Supervised Reading in Russian Literature
description: Independent reading course in topics not covered in regularly scheduled courses. Students select a topic in consultation with the faculty member who has agreed to supervise the course work.

class: RUSSL 6611
class title: Supervised Reading and Research
description: Independent study. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: proficiency in Russian or permission of instructor.

class: SANSK 1131
class title: Elementary Sanskrit I
description: An introduction to the essentials of Sanskrit grammar. Designed to enable the student to read classical and epic Sanskrit as soon as possible.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: SANSK 2251
class title: Intermediate Sanskrit I
description: Readings from simple Sanskrit poetry: the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SANSK 1132 or permission of instructor.

class: SANSK 3301
class title: Advanced Sanskrit I
description: Selected readings in Sanskrit literary and philosophical texts.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: two years study of Sanskrit or equivalent.

class: SHUM 1100
class title: Art Histories: An Introduction
description: This team-taught course introduces students to the History of Art as a global and interdisciplinary field. Led by a selection of professors from the department, in collaboration with staff and faculty of the Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art, its primary aim is to familiarize students with the most significant geographical areas, epochs and works of art, as well as with methods employed in their study and analysis. The course will be organized around a changing selection of themes central to the history of art. The theme for fall 2024 is "Materiality." Considering how artists and artisans from antiquity to the present have mobilized a broad range of materials and processes to create works of art, we will explore the intimate relationship between makers, matter, and meaning.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 1615
class title: Introduction to Ancient Rome
description: Ancient Rome was a village the size of Ithaca that grew into a world empire. In this course students will be introduced to some of its literature, art, and famous personalities in the classical period (2nd c. BCE – 2nd c. CE) and will read some of the greatest masterpieces of Latin literature. Special attention will be given to the late republic, Augustan, and Hadrianic periods, to Roman ethics, and to the rise of Christianity. No prior knowledge of the ancient world is necessary. All readings are in English.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 1900
class title: Global Engagements: Living and Working in a Diverse World
description: How might we engage with communities, whether here in Ithaca or across the globe, in our diverse histories, experiences, and perspectives? What structural forces shape inequalities and how do communities go about addressing social and racial injustice? This course is designed to help students bring global engaged learning into their Cornell education with a focus on community engaged learning in Ithaca. It introduces skills that are vital for intercultural engagement, including participant-observation research, ethnographic writing, and the habits of critical reflexivity. Through readings, film, and community partnerships, we will learn about global/local issues including the gendered and racialized aspects of labor, food and housing insecurity, structural violence, and migration. Students will complete projects that help them learn with and from Ithaca community members and organizations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG)

class: SHUM 2006
class title: Punk Culture: The Art and Politics of Refusal
description: Punk Culture–comprised of music, fashion, literature, and visual arts–represents a complex critical stance of resistance and refusal that coalesced at a particular historical moment in the mid-1970s, and continues to be invoked, revived, and revised. In this course we will explore punk's origins in New York and London, U.S. punk's regional differences (the New York scene's connection to the art and literary worlds, Southern California's skate and surf culture, etc.), its key movements (hardcore, straight edge, riot grrrl, crust, queercore), its race, class and gender relations, and its ongoing influence on global youth culture. We will read, listen, and examine a variety of visual media to analyze how punk draws from and alters previous aesthetic and political movements. No previous experience studying music is necessary.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 2011
class title: September 11 and the Politics of Memory
description: As a country, we are what we remember. But who decides what facts and stories about the past are important enough to memorialize? What does that decision tell us about power and truth? This class will discuss how the attacks of September 11 are remembered in the United States and the rest of the world.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SHUM 2101
class title: South Asian Diaspora
description: This interdisciplinary course (with an emphasis in anthropology) will introduce students to the multiple routes/roots, lived experiences, and imagined worlds of South Asians who have traveled to various lands at different historical moments spanning Fiji, South Africa, Mauritius, Britain, Malaysia, United States, Trinidad, and even within South Asia itself such as the Tamil-speaking population of Sri Lanka. The course will begin with the labor migrations of the 1830s and continue up to the present period. The primary exercise will be to compare and contrast the varied expressions of the South Asian Diaspora globally in order to critically evaluate this transnational identity. Thus, we will ask what, if any, are the ties that bind a fifth-generation Indo-Trinidadian whose ancestor came to the New World as an indentured laborer or "coolie" in the mid-19th century to labor in the cane fields, to a Pakistani medical doctor who migrated to the United States in the late 1980s. If Diaspora violates a sense of identity based on territorial integrity, then could "culture" serve as the basis for a shared identity?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 2208
class title: Introduction to Southeast Asia
description: What is Southeast Asia? How does this faraway, "exotic," region intersect with our realities? This course introduces key questions in the study of Southeast Asia (which includes Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam) and its diasporas using cinematic, literary, historical and scholarly materials. This introduction to Southeast Asia's historical, religious, literary, visual, and political traditions -- and the ways in which scholars have thought about them -- addresses a variety of themes  including notions of kinship, gender, political conflict, colonialism, media and the arts, sexuality, textual and visual genres, and forms of belief and belonging. Students will have an opportunity to investigate topics of interest to them, in the form of research essays as well as small-scale fieldwork, curatorial, or media projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 2244
class title: The Music, Art, and Technology of the Organ
description: The organ is an interdisciplinary wonder where mechanics, architecture, acoustics, religion, philosophy, literature, as well as the musical arts and sciences meet. This course uses the organ to explore music's relation to technology, history and culture, and in turn traces the technical and mechanical mysteries, and expressive possibilities, of the 'King of Instruments' across its long history. Students will gain 1) an understanding of some key aspects of musical history and repertoire; 2) a sense for the historical relation between music and technology; 3) a new knowledge of (and enthusiasm for!) the organ; and 4) an insight into the ways in which musical instruments and the musical practice associated with them are cross-cultural and interdisciplinary. With a key focus on the music of J. S. Bach, as well as on the reception of Bach's music in the 19th and 20th centuries, topics include the mechanics of organ construction, the North German organ art and the toccata, virtuosity and the use of the feet, the symphonic organ in the 19th century, 20th-century experimentation with organ sound, the organ and film. The course combines lectures with sessions at the organs as well as regular organ recitals. No prior musical experience necessary, although those interested (and with some keyboard skills) will have the opportunity for an introduction to learning to play – with both hands and feet.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 2354
class title: African American Visions of Africa
description: This seminar examines some of the political and cultural visions of Africa and Africans held by African-American intellectuals and activists in the 19th and 20th centuries. Emphasis is placed on the philosophies of black nationalism, Pan Africanism and anticolonialism and the themes of emigration, expatriation, repatriation and exile. Awareness of Africa and attitudes toward the continent and its peoples have profoundly shaped African-American identity, culture and political consciousness. Notions of a linked fate between Africans and black Americans have long influenced black life and liberation struggles within the U.S. The motives, purposes and outlooks of African-American theorists who have claimed political, cultural, or spiritual connection to Africa and Africans have varied widely, though they have always powerfully reflected black experiences in America and in the West. The complexity and dynamism of those views belie simplistic assumptions about essential or "natural" relationships, and invite critical contemplation of the myriad roles that Africa has played in the African-American mind."
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: SHUM 2437
class title: Economy, Power, and Inequality
description: How do humans organize production, distribution, exchange, and consumption? What social, political, environmental, and religious values underlie different forms of economic organization? And how do they produce racial, ethnic, class, gender, and sexual inequalities? This course uses a range of historical and contemporary case studies to address these questions, in the process introducing a range of analytic approaches including formalism, substantivism, Marxist and feminist theory, critical race studies, and science and technology studies. Course themes include gifts and commodities; the nature of money, markets, and finance; credit and debt relations; labor, property, and value; licit and illicit economies; capitalism and socialism; development and underdevelopment.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SHUM 2650
class title: Introduction to African American Literature
description: This course will introduce students to African American literary traditions in the space that would become North America. From early freedom narratives and poetry to Hip-Hop and film, we will trace a range of artistic conventions and cultural movements while paying close attention to broader historical shifts in American life over the past three centuries. We'll read broadly: poetry, fiction, speculative fiction, newspapers, and the like. We will ask: How do authors create, define, and even exceed a tradition? What are some of the recurring themes and motifs within this tradition? Authors may include: Phillis Wheatley, David Walker, Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, W.E.B. DuBois, Zora Neale Hurston, James Baldwin, Octavia Butler, Toni Morrison, and Eve Ewing. This course satisfies the Literatures of the Americas requirement for English majors.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (D-AG)

class: SHUM 2750
class title: Introduction to Humanities
description: These seminars offer an introduction to the humanities by exploring historical, cultural, social, and political themes. Students will explore themes in critical dialogue with a range of texts and media drawn from the arts, humanities, and/or humanistic social sciences. Guest speakers, including Cornell faculty and Society for the Humanities Fellows, will present from different disciplines and points of view. Students will make field trips to relevant local sites and visit Cornell special collections and archives. Students enrolled in these seminars will have the opportunity to participate in additional programming related to the annual focus theme of Cornell's Society for the Humanities and the Humanities Scholars Program for undergraduate humanities research.

class: SHUM 2754
class title: Wondrous Literatures of the Near East
description: This course examines Near East's rich and diverse literary heritage. We will read a selection of influential and wondrous texts from ancient to modern times, spanning geographically from the Iberian peninsula to Iran. We will explore a range of ancient myths of creation and destruction. We will also trace encounters with otherness in travel narratives. Together we will read and discuss such ancient works as the "The Story of Sinuhe" and "The Epic of Gilgamesh," as well as selections from the Hebrew Bible, New Testament and Qur'an. We will explore medieval works such as the "Travels" of Ibn Battuta, the "Shahnameh" of Ferdowsi, and "The Arabian Nights." We will also read Orhan Pamuk's My Name is Red, and Sonia Nimr's Wondrous Journeys in Strange Lands, as well as excerpts from Yochi Brandes's The Orchard. Students will also have the opportunity to research and analyze primary source materials in the collections of Cornell Rare Books and Manuscript Collection, and the Johnson Art Museum. All material is in English translation.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 2792
class title: Monuments, Museums, and Memory: An Introduction to Public History
description: In this course we will examine how we have come to narrate social, cultural, and political history in the United States, investigating the ways scholarly, curatorial, archival, and creative practices shape conceptions of the American past, in particular understandings of racial, gender, sexual, and class oppression and resistance. Students will build skills in historical interpretation and archival research and explore possibilities and challenges in preserving and presenting the past in a variety of public contexts—monuments, memorials, museums, historical sites, movies and television, and community-based history projects.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 3230
class title: Humans and Animals
description: Human-animal relationships are often seen in utilitarian, nutritional terms, particularly in archaeology. But animals and meat have significance far beyond their economic value. This course focuses on a broad range of these non-dietary roles of animals in human societies, past and present. This includes the fundamental shift in human-animal relations associated with domestication; the varied meanings of wild and domestic animals; as well as the importance of animals as wealth, as objects of sacrifice, as totems or metaphors for humans, and as symbols in art. Meat can be used in feasting and meat sharing to create, cement, and manipulate social relationships. This course is open to students of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and other disciplines with an interest in human-animal relations.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: SHUM 3555
class title: Comics as a Medium
description: What are comics? While it's easy to identify a cartoon, graphic novel, or comic book, it's hard to understand the wide world of comics. As a medium, comics are part of a global tradition of visual storytelling and sequential art, including premodern tapestries, early modern pamphlets, and modern children's books, political cartoons, and animated films. With a focus on the German-speaking world, we will examine a wide range of comics genres (e.g., fiction, history, autobiography, journalism, comix) and formats (e.g., books, strips, pamphlets, zines). Our discussions will address questions of taste, aesthetics, materiality, censorship, representation, and word-image relations. While we will primarily be reading and writing about comics and comics studies, students will also gain some exposure to making comics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 3635
class title: Queer Classics
description: This course engages classical antiquity and its reception through the prism of queer studies. Cruising Homer, Sappho, Euripides, Plato, Ovid and more, we will explore how queer theoretical frameworks help us account for premodern queer and trans bodies, desires, experiences, and aesthetics. We will trace how people historically have engaged with the classical past in political and affective projects of writing queer history and literature, constructing identities and communities, and imagining queer futures. We will unpack how classical scholarship might reproduce contemporary forms of homophobia and transphobia in its treatments of gender, sexuality, and embodiment in the classical past, and in turn how modern uses of the classical might reinforce or dismantle exclusionary narratives around 'queerness' today as it intersects with race, gender, sexuality, and class. Finally, we will consider how the work we are doing in this class (where the 'Queer' in 'Queer Classics' may be taken as an adjective or an imperative) relates to the ways that contemporary writers, activists, artists, and performers have animated the classical past with queer possibilities. All readings will be in translation; no knowledge of Latin and Greek is required.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 3742
class title: Africans and African Americans in Literature
description: When an African and an African American meet, solidarity is presumed, but often friction is the result.  In this course, we will consider how Africans and African Americans see each other through literature.  What happens when two peoples suffering from double consciousness meet?  We will examine the influence of historical forces including slavery, colonialism and pan-Africanism on the way writers explore the meeting between Africans and African Americans. Specifically we will look at how writers and political figures such as Maya Angelou, Chimamanda Adichie, Richard Wright, Eugene Robinson, Philippe Wamba, Martin Luther King Junior and Malcolm X have understood the meeting.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: SHUM 4212
class title: Black Women's Autobiography in the 21st Century WritingHerStory
description: Black women first began to shape the genre of autobiography during antebellum era slavery. They were prolific in developing the genre of autobiography throughout the twentieth century, to the point of emerging as serial autobiographers in the case of Maya Angelou. Significantly, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1970), the first autobiography of six by Angelou, along with autobiographies by a range of other black women writers, helped to launch the renaissance in black women's literature and criticism in African American literature during the 1970s. In this course, we will focus on how black women have continued to write and share their personal stories in the new millennium by examining autobiographies that they have produced in the first years of the twenty-first century. More broadly, we will consider the impact of this writing on twenty-first century African American literature, as well as African diasporan writing in Africa and the Caribbean. In the process, we will draw on a range of critical and theoretical perspectives.  We will read memoirs and autobiographies by a range of figures, including Michelle Obama, Jennifer Lewis, Monica Coleman, Serena Williams, Gabrielle Union, and Tiffany Haddish, among others. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4540
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SHUM 4584
class title: Bordering Humanity: Race and Migration in the Modern Middle East and North Africa
description: This course is an historical introduction to the study of borders, race, and migration in the modern Middle East and North Africa. We will explore the fundamental migration events that have shaped the Middle Eastern and North African history, including global settler movements, enslavement and forced migration, partitions and population transfers, and contemporary refugee crises. We will discuss how race and migration shaped successive border regimes and competing world orders from the 19th century to the present. Analyzing a diverse array of primary sources from legal texts and maps to poetry and literature, we will pursue answers to questions such as: What are the legal, social, and political structures which govern international migration? What laws, ideas, and affects construct political borders? What happens to those who breach them? How do the legacies of racial slavery, settler colonialism, and ethno-nationalism unsettle the borders of contemporary Middle East and North Africa?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Co-meets with NES 6584/SHUM 6584.

class: SHUM 4693
class title: Silent No More: Deaf and Disability History in the United States
description: Disabilities, broadly defined, are not exclusively clinical phenomena that belong to the realm of healthcare professionals and rehabilitation specialists. Instead, disability is a lived human experience that is always already embedded in a set of socially constructed ideas that change over time, across cultures, and in relation to race, gender, class and sexuality. Disability is embodied but also discursively constituted, shaped by social injustice and the built environment, and often rendered paradoxically visible and invisible in an ableist and audist world. This seminar explores these complex dynamics and the ways that disability – as an experience and a category of analysis – illuminates new interpretations of major themes and developments in American history like labor, citizenship, immigration, medicine, and activism.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4694
class title: Political Violence in Contemporary Fiction: Silence as Compassion or Complicity
description: This course examines contemporary works of fiction that depict episodes of political violence between WWII and today. During this period, there have been 344 conflicts that have killed 500 or more people, but the public attention they receive varies tremendously. New novels and stories disclose and challenge silences surrounding events neglected in global public memory. What role can these works play in altering the kinds of stories heard within and beyond the university? Which voices do they portray as empowered or neglected? How can silence around violence be both compassionate and complicit? What are the ethics of storytelling related to different forms of silence, and what does it mean to read in a way that is compassionate or complicitly silent?
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4697
class title: Is Nature Silent?
description: Thoreau, in 1841: "Nature is always silent and unpretending as at the break of day." He had just contrasted the robin's song with "the bustle and impatience of man." Why could silence contain birdsong but not human noise? This course explores the idea and representation of nature's silence—as a positive ideal; as soundlessness; as wordlessness; and as extinction. Heeding the environmental criticism that interrogates the contrast between silent "Nature" and noisy humanity, we will remain curious about what compels us in accounts of nature's multivalent silence. Concurrently, we will examine writings that attend to natural sound. Investigating silence, we will also strive to better understand what we mean, and what could be meant, by nature.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SHUM 4750
class title: Senior Capstone Seminar for Humanities Scholars
description: This course is designed to support seniors in the Humanities Scholars Program working on their capstone projects. Students in the course will be guided in their project research and writing. The course aligns with the following HSP learning goals.
outcome: Creating a cohort of humanities researchers (students meet weekly to discuss their projects, short- and long-term goals, and how they are progressing)., Sharing work in progress so that each student can test out arguments, forms of presentation, and evaluate their disciplinary positions., Gaining experience working collaboratively and in groups., 

class: SHUM 6200
class title: Field Methods in Community-Engaged Archaeology
description: Community-engaged archaeology brings together knowledgeable communities located within and beyond academic institutions who collaborate to produce higher-quality accounts of the past. In this course, students will build their archaeological fieldwork and laboratory skills while contributing to strong university-community relationships in the local area. Drawing on historical documents, previous scholarship, expert collaborators, and archaeological investigation, students in this course contribute to the understanding of regional sites and landmarks. The topic for Fall 2022 addresses the Underground Railroad through a partnership between Ithaca's historic St. James AME Church, the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies, and local schools. Students in this course will study archaeological evidence related to the everyday experiences of people who formed part of a congregation active in the Underground Railroad during the early- to mid-19th century.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one prior course in archaeology or history.

class: SHUM 6540
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.

class: SHUM 6584
class title: Bordering Humanity: Race and Migration in the Modern Middle East and North Africa
description: This course is an historical introduction to the study of borders, race, and migration in the modern Middle East and North Africa. We will explore the fundamental migration events that have shaped the Middle Eastern and North African history, including global settler movements, enslavement and forced migration, partitions and population transfers, and contemporary refugee crises. We will discuss how race and migration shaped successive border regimes and competing world orders from the 19th century to the present. Analyzing a diverse array of primary sources from legal texts and maps to poetry and literature, we will pursue answers to questions such as: What are the legal, social, and political structures which govern international migration? What laws, ideas, and affects construct political borders? What happens to those who breach them? How do the legacies of racial slavery, settler colonialism, and ethno-nationalism unsettle the borders of contemporary Middle East and North Africa?

class: SHUM 6639
class title: Global Currents: Immobility and Multi-Sited Ethnography
description: Ever-increasing global interconnection drives some of the most pressing political and ethical questions of our time. This seminar centers on two intersecting areas of inquiry. The first deals with the nature of global movements: how people, ideas, arts, and capital move through world. Engaging postcolonial theory and scholarship on contemporary migration and transnationalism, we will interrogate the idea of borders and nations as well as those categories—like diaspora—that surpass or circumvent them. The second addresses how and why we might study these processes ethnographically. Here we will consider the potential and limitations of multi-sited and global ethnography, and question the possibility of an activist ethnography of global interconnection.

class: SHUM 6693
class title: Silent No More: Deaf and Disability History in the United States
description: Disabilities, broadly defined, are not exclusively clinical phenomena that belong to the realm of healthcare professionals and rehabilitation specialists. Instead, disability is a lived human experience that is always already embedded in a set of socially constructed ideas that change over time, across cultures, and in relation to race, gender, class and sexuality. Disability is embodied but also discursively constituted, shaped by social injustice and the built environment, and often rendered paradoxically visible and invisible in an ableist and audist world. This seminar explores these complex dynamics and the ways that disability – as an experience and a category of analysis – illuminates new interpretations of major themes and developments in American history like labor, citizenship, immigration, medicine, and activism.

class: SHUM 6694
class title: Political Violence in Contemporary Fiction: Silence as Compassion or Complicity
description: This course examines contemporary works of fiction that depict episodes of political violence between WWII and today. During this period, there have been 344 conflicts that have killed 500 or more people, but the public attention they receive varies tremendously. New novels and stories disclose and challenge silences surrounding events neglected in global public memory. What role can these works play in altering the kinds of stories heard within and beyond the university? Which voices do they portray as empowered or neglected? How can silence around violence be both compassionate and complicit? What are the ethics of storytelling related to different forms of silence, and what does it mean to read in a way that is compassionate or complicitly silent?

class: SHUM 6695
class title: Queer Archives and Archiving Queerness
description: This course contemplates challenges associated with researching and representing LGBTQ+ pasts. We approach this topic from several angles: 1) by asking what constitutes "queer" and "trans" in different historical contexts and different geographical locations, when sexuality and gender are by their nature fluid; 2) by training in LGBTQ+ archival methods; and 3) by engagement with queer and trans artivists who make archives central to their praxis. We will visit Cornell's Human Sexuality collection, explore online repositories and academic databases (e.g., ONE and Cengage), and consider archive-based artistic projects (e.g., Killjoy's Castle and MOTHA).

class: SHUM 6697
class title: Is Nature Silent?
description: Thoreau, in 1841: "Nature is always silent and unpretending as at the break of day." He had just contrasted the robin's song with "the bustle and impatience of man." Why could silence contain birdsong but not human noise? This course explores the idea and representation of nature's silence—as a positive ideal; as soundlessness; as wordlessness; and as extinction. Heeding the environmental criticism that interrogates the contrast between silent "Nature" and noisy humanity, we will remain curious about what compels us in accounts of nature's multivalent silence. Concurrently, we will examine writings that attend to natural sound. Investigating silence, we will also strive to better understand what we mean, and what could be meant, by nature.

class: SINHA 1100
class title: Elements of Sinhala Language and Culture
description: This course will introduce the basic Sinhala language elements and elements of Sri Lankan culture for those who are interested in the field of language and culture. Also for those planning to travel to Sri Lanka, heritage students, etc.

class: SINHA 1121
class title: Elementary Sinhala I
description: Semi-intensive introduction to colloquial Sinhala, intended for beginners. A thorough grounding is given in all the language skills; listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: SINHA 2201
class title: Intermediate Sinhala I
description: This course further develops student competence in colloquial Sinhala, attending to all the language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, this course prepares students for the transition to literary Sinhala.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SINHA 1122 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

class: SINHA 3301
class title: Literary Sinhala I
description: This one-semester course provides an introduction to the distinctive grammatical forms and vocabulary used in Literary Sinhala. While focused particularly on the development of reading skills, the course also introduces students to Literary Sinhala composition, and builds students' listening comprehension of semi-literary Sinhala forms (such as those used in radio and TV news).
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SINHA 2201, SINHA 2202 and permission of instructor.

class: SINHA 4400
class title: Literary Sinhala II
description: This one-semester course further develops students' comprehension of written Literary Sinhala, using sample materials from a variety of genres prepared by the instructor, as well as excerpts from texts relevant to graduate student research (when appropriate).
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SINHA 3301 and permission of instructor.

class: SNLIT 6601
class title: Topics in Sanskrit Literature I
description: Advanced readings in Sanskrit poetic, philosophical, and grammatical literature. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SANSK 3302 or equivalent.

class: SOC 1101
class title: Introduction to Sociology
description: This course is a broad introduction to the field of sociology. Course materials are designed to illustrate the distinctive features of the sociological perspective and to start you thinking sociologically about yourself and the broader social world. To think sociologically is to recognize that being embedded in the world constrains behavior, and that individuals are both social actors and social products. To think sociologically is also to recognize that our contemporary world, with its enduring cultural, political, and economic institutions, is as much a social product as we are. We will begin by covering theoretical and methodological foundations of the sociological perspective.  We will go on to explore the concept of social stratification and will survey primary axes of social difference. In the second half of the course we will look more closely at how individuals relate to each other, how social inequality is enacted and reinforced in everyday life, and at the way in which the organization of social life shapes individuals and groups, such as through social networks, residential neighborhoods, schooling, families, and on-line communication.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 1290
class title: American Society through Film
description: Introduces students to the sociological analysis of American society through the lens of film. Major themes involve race, class, and gender; upward and downward mobility; incorporation and exclusion; small town vs the big city; and cultural conflicts over individualism, achievement, and community. We match a range of movies like American Graffiti (Lucas), Ace in the Hole (Wilder), The Asphalt Jungle (Houston), Do the Right Thing (Lee), The Heiress (Wyler), High Noon (Zinnemann), Mean Streets (Scorsese), Nashville (Altman), The Philadelphia Story (Cukor), and A Streetcar Named Desire (Kazan). Each film is paired with social scientific research that examines parallel topics, such as analyses of who goes to college, the production of news, deviant careers, urban riots, the gendered presentation of self, and the prisoner's dilemma.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2070
class title: Social Problems in the United States
description: "Social Problems in the U.S." teaches students how to think like a social scientist when encountering claims about major contemporary issues. Through readings and assignments, students develop an analytical toolkit for evaluating the scope, causes, consequences, and proposed solutions to a wide range of complicated social problems, such as: childhood poverty, racial segregation and discrimination, job insecurity, family instability, discrimination by sexual identity, unequal pay for women's work, gender imbalances in family life, health disparities, food insecurity, drug abuse, and educational inequality. Rather than cover all of these (and other) social problems in depth, the course emphasizes a conceptual framework that can be applied broadly. The semester culminates with a written proposal examining a social problem and developing an approach to address it with public policy.
outcome: Develop a strategy for discussing controversial social issues with others who hold competing perspectives., Demonstrate an understanding of core concepts from Sociology and Policy Analysis as they relate to topics in education, health, and social welfare., Distinguish between normative, descriptive, and causal claims about social problems as they emerge in public debate., Evaluate the validity of claims about social problems by drawing on evidence from empirical research., Analyze trade-offs and unintended consequences implicated in the design and implementation of social policies., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2090
class title: Networks
description: This interdisciplinary course examines network structures and how they matter in everyday life. The course examines how each of the computing, economic, sociological and natural worlds are connected and how the structure of these connections affects each of these worlds. Tools of graph theory and game theory are taught and then used to analyze networks. Topics covered include the web, the small world phenomenon, markets, neural networks, contagion, search and the evolution of networks.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2202
class title: Population and Social Change
description: Introduction to population studies. The primary focus is on the relationships between demographic processes (fertility, mortality, and immigration) and social and economic issues. Discussion covers special topics related to population growth and spatial distribution, including marriage and family formation, population aging, changing roles and statuses of women, labor force participation, immigrations, urban growth and urbanization, resource allocation, and the environment.
outcome: Understand and examine the determinants and consequences of demographic change, and components therein in the US and internationally., Examine the mutual interrelationships between population and society., Understand alternative policy approaches associated with challenges and opportunities presented by changing population size and composition., Utilize basic methodological approaches to population analysis., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (CA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2220
class title: Controversies About Inequality
description: In recent years, poverty and inequality have become increasingly common topics of public debate, as academics, journalists, and politicians attempt to come to terms with growing income inequality, with the increasing visibility of inter-country differences in wealth and income, and with the persistence of racial, ethnic, and gender stratification. This course introduces students to ongoing social scientific debates about the sources and consequences of inequality, as well as the types of public policy that might appropriately be pursued to reduce (or increase) inequality. These topics will be addressed in related units, some of which include guest lectures by faculty from other universities (funded by the Center for the Study of Inequality). Each unit culminates with a highly spirited class discussion and debate.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2370
class title: Race, Racism, and Public Policy
description: Public policy is a fundamental mechanism for addressing the most vexing and important social problems of our time. Racial inequality and structural racism are chief among such problems. Policy is thus widely understood and frequently touted as a means for redressing the harms of racism. Yet, public policy has also been identified as a channel through which racism flows. These seemingly paradoxical understandings of the relationships between racism and public policy raise critical questions about equality, democracy, the economy, and politics. This course examines such questions. questions. We begin by theoretically grounding key concepts such as "race" "racism" and "public policy." We then consider the historical record, highlighting the fundamental role of racism in shaping politics and policy. Next, we build on these conceptual and historical foundations through thematic investigation of core policy elements (e.g., policy design, policy implementation, policy feedback), key policy institutions (e.g., legislatures, parties) and significant policy actors (e.g., social movement organizations, interest groups). Finally, the class wraps up with a series of policy "deep dives" involving close examination of specific policy domains (e.g., housing, health, the enviornment). This course provides students with the knowledge and analytical tools necessary to better understand the realities and complexities of race, racism, and public policy in the United States.
outcome: Demonstrate significant knowledge about race, racism, and public policy., Apply such knowledge to the analysis of pressing social problems., Write about race and public policy with clarity and empirical grounding., Discuss intellectually rigorous content about contentious issues., 
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 2510
class title: Social Gerontology: Aging and the Life Course
description: Analyzes the social aspects of aging in contemporary American society from a life course perspective. Topics include (1) an introduction to the field of gerontology, its history, theories, and research methods; (2) a brief overview of the physiological and psychological changes that accompany aging; (3) an analysis of the contexts (e.g., family, friends, social support, employment, volunteer work) in which individual aging occurs, including differences of gender, ethnicity, and social class; and (4) the influences of society on the aging individual.
outcome: Be able to relate public health and sociological  research on health inequalities to differences in aging experiences across groups., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite:   HD 1130, SOC 1101, DSOC 1101, or PSYCH 1101.

class: SOC 2580
class title: Six Pretty Good Books: Explorations in Social Science
description: This course is modeled after "Great Books" literature courses in the humanities, but with two important differences: we read non-fiction books in the social sciences rather than the humanities, written by highly prominent contemporary social scientists. The course title refers to the fact that the books are new, hence their potential greatness has yet to be confirmed by the test of time. We choose living authors to give students a unique opportunity: to interact with each of the six authors in Q&amp;A sessions via live or recorded video conferencing. 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 3010
class title: Statistics for Sociological Research
description: This course will introduce students to the theory and mathematics of statistical analysis. Many decisions made by ourselves and others around us are based on statistics, yet few people have a solid grip on the strengths and limitations of these techniques. This course will provide a firm foundation for statistical reasoning and logical inference using probability. While there is math in this course, it is not a math class per se, as a considerable amount of attention is devoted to interpreting statistics as well as calculating them.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SSC-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 3380
class title: Urban Inequality
description: This is an interdisciplinary seminar on inequality in metropolitan American that draws on scholarship from sociology, history, political science, and public policy. The first part of the course is dedicated to understanding the political, historical, and social determinants of inequality in America's cities and their surrounding suburbs. Politically and socially, cities face unique challenges. Municipalities lack much formal authority to resolve issues that arise within their borders and their populations are often highly heterogeneous. In the second part of the course, we investigate several contemporary urban issues, such as schooling, gentrification, immigration, climate change, and downtown development.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 3750
class title: Classical Sociological Theory
description: This course introduces the classics in sociology – primarily works by Karl Marx, Max Weber, Émile Durkheim, and Georg Simmel. Students will also study some works of Adam Smith, Alexis de Tocqueville, Jane Addams, W.E.B. Du Bois, Talcott Parsons, members of the Chicago School of Sociology, and others. Special emphasis is placed on the concepts, ideas, and analytical approaches that characterize the foundations of sociology, and how those elements have informed the broader scholarly dialogue in sociology since its inception.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 3820
class title: Migration: Histories, Controversies, and Perspectives
description: This introductory course introduces students to issues and debates related to international migration and will provide an interdisciplinary foundation to understanding the factors that shape migration flows and migrant experiences. We will start by reviewing theories of the state and historical examples of immigrant racialization and exclusion in the United States and beyond. We will critically examine the notions of borders, citizenship/non-citizenship, and the creation of diasporas. Students will also hear a range of perspectives by exposing them to Cornell guest faculty who do research and teach on migration across different disciplines and methodologies and in different world areas. Examples include demographic researchers concerned with immigrant inequality and family formation, geographic perspectives on the changing landscapes of immigrant metropolises, legal scholarship on the rights of immigrant workers, and the study of immigrant culture from a feminist studies lens. Offered each fall semester.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 4120
class title: Health and Social Context
description: What is health? What does it mean to be "healthy" (or not) in today's world? How does health (or illness) shape an individual's identity and relationship to other people and institutions? This course grapples with the social underpinnings of health and has two main components: substantive and practice. First (substantive), we will explore core concepts and methods from the research areas of medical sociology and population health. We will read a wide range of qualitative and quantitative research on topics such as disease, reproductive health, sexuality, public health, medicalization, inequality, and activism. These readings spread across 3 thematic units: (1) what is health?, (2) health disparities, and (3) politics of health. Second (practice), we will focus on research design and writing. You will develop your own research question about the relationship between social context and health and will spend the semester collecting and analyzing data, drafting and revising your results, and polishing and presenting your social science research. This course is supported by Cornell's John S. Knight Institute for Writing in the Disciplines as a "Writing in the Majors (WIM)" course. As such, our aim is to integrate learning about our topic and developing our skills as writers in advanced undergraduate courses across the College of Arts &amp; Sciences.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SDS-AS) (D-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: SOC 4370
class title: Sociology of Sex and Gender
description: This course provides an introduction to the theoretical and empirical literature on the sociology of sex and gender. The readings cover theory and methods, feminism, masculinity, intersectionality, international/comparative perspectives, gender roles, and recent sociological research in this area.
distribution categories: (SCD-AS, SSC-AS) (D-AG, SBA-AG)

class: SOC 4440
class title: Economic Sociology of Social Inequalities
description: This seminar explores the causes and consequences of social inequalities embedded in economic institutions and markets. From hierarchies to markets, stratification is embedded in networks and norms that enable and guide economic action. As such, the mechanisms of social inequalities involve processes that are hidden in everyday social interactions. The economic sociology of social inequalities encompasses systems of class power, ethnic and racial stratification, and gender inequalities. We will use a case study method to explore and dissect the economic sources of social inequalities in everyday life.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 4540
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: SOC 4580
class title: The Science of Social Behavior
description: This is a capstone seminar for seniors who are interested in graduate or professional study in scientific disciplines that focus on human behavior and social interaction. The intent is to provide seniors with an opportunity to summon, integrate, and apply insights that they have acquired over the course of their undergraduate education, and give prospective graduate students the opportunity to lead discussions in a large introductory lecture course, "Six Pretty Good Books". Each seminar member is part of a two or three-person team that leads the discussion together, under the supervision of a graduate teaching assistant. Seminar meetings are devoted to building lesson plans for leading an effective discussion of each of the six books. The authors vary from year to year but include Malcolm Gladwell, Michelle Alexander, Nate Silver, and Nicholas Christakis. All authors have agreed to participate in a "Q&amp;A" session with the students which seminar members are required to attend.

class: SOC 4910
class title: Independent Study
description: This is for undergraduates who wish to obtain research experience or to do extensive reading on a special topic.

class: SOC 4950
class title: Honors Research
description: Students choose a sociology faculty member to work with on research to write an honors thesis. Candidates for honors must maintain a cumulative GPA at least an A- in all sociology classes.

class: SOC 4960
class title: Honors Thesis: Senior Year
description: Continuation of SOC 4950.  Continue to work with honors supervisor and work on and write an honors thesis.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SOC 4950.

class: SOC 5010
class title: Basic Problems in Sociology I
description:  

class: SOC 5190
class title: Workshop on Social Inequality
description: This course provides a forum in which students and others can present, discuss, and receive instant feedback on their inequality-related research. Its primary goals is to help students advance their own research; its secondary goal is to introduce selected debates in the contemporary inequality literature in a more comprehensive fashion that is possible in the introductory graduate-level seminar on inequality.

class: SOC 6010
class title: Statistics for Sociological Research
description: This course provides an introduction to analytical approaches in quantitative sociological research. The class will cover data description and graphical approaches, elementary probability theory, hypothesis testing, bivariate and multivariate linear regression, and data analysis and interpretation. Although the course will be taught using basic mathematics and statistics, I will develop the topics intuitively throughout the course. The class is geared towards sociological thinking--all homework and class examples will use real data and focus on questions from the social world. The course covers the basic building blocks of quantitative data analysis with the goal of training students to be informed consumers of quantitative social science research. This class is also the starting point for students interested in using quantitative methods in their own research.

class: SOC 6080
class title: Proseminar in Sociology
description: Discussion of the current state of sociology and of the research interests of members of the graduate field; taught by all members of the field.

class: SOC 6130
class title: Logics and Methods of Sociological Research
description: This course will expose students to ethnography, experiments, small-N comparison, content analysis, archival research, internet data scraping, data visualization, network and sequence approaches, and more. We will begin to answer the following core questions: What are the strengths of different methods? What are their weaknesses? What assumptions about research design issues are built into each method? What assumptions about the scientific status of sociology are built into each method? How can different methods be combined so that their strengths and weaknesses balance one another?

class: SOC 6150
class title: Qualitative, Survey, and Mixed Method Approaches to Policy Research
description: Introduces students to theories and methods of data collection techniques such as in-depth interviews, ethnography, focus groups, and surveys as well as mixed-method approaches used in policy and evaluation research. Addresses the strengths and weaknesses of various methods and the design of qualitative and mixed-method studies. Covers epistemology, ethics, induction and deduction, measurement, validity, and triangulation. Also discusses more concrete issues such as gaining access to a field site, developing a qualitative interview guide and survey questionnaire, conducting a qualitative interview, managing data, and assessing data quality.

class: SOC 6270
class title: Sociology of Religion
description: This seminar focuses on the social causes and consequences of religion, using the frameworks and methods of social science to understand religion and non-religion and their implications for social life. It will introduce basic ideas in the sociology of religion and survey the social landscape of religion in the United States and around the world. This seminar, while covering a number of key texts and core topics, will put particular attention on the ways religion intersects with inequality and politics. We will be less concerned with religion for its own sake than for its substantial social implications. Religion has been one of the most powerful and pervasive forces throughout history and remains so today. Without an understanding of religion, a central part of the lives of millions of Americans and billions of people around the world, you cannot fully understand American society or world politics.

class: SOC 6340
class title: Sociology of Education
description: This course serves as a graduate-level introduction to sociological theories and research on schooling, education systems, and the interaction between schools and other dominant social institutions, such as the family. In this course, we will explore variation in the context of schooling, the social organization of schools, and a range of topics linking schooling to social stratification. Although this course will primarily focus on elementary and secondary education in the United States, we will also cover topics in higher education and from an international comparative perspective.

class: SOC 6540
class title: Fascism, Nationalism and Populism
description: This seminar will look broadly at challenges to democratic institutions in the United States and Europe. To think about the present, we will delve into historical fascism as well as nationalism and populism. We will (1) respond to contemporary political events in the US and beyond; (2) explore the terms "fascism" and "populism" which in the last few years have come to dominate our political vocabulary in the media and the academy; (3) mobilize the instructor's area of academic expertise (fascism and populism) in the service of broad liberal arts concerns. The course focuses upon themes and readings. It is not chronological—rather it looks at different iterations of the same ideas, concepts, and fears as they emerge in different historical contexts. Seminar materials draw upon various sources: scholarly articles, films, and if possible, an occasional guest lecturer.

class: SOC 6610
class title: Text and Networks in Social Science Research
description: This is a course on networks and text in quantitative social science. The course will cover published research using text and social network data, focusing on health, politics, and everyday life, and it will introduce methods and approaches for incorporating high-dimensional data into familiar research designs. Students will evaluate past studies and propose original research.
outcome: Learn to critically evaluate empirical research that uses text as data or social network analysis., Connect fundamentals of research design to high-dimensional data analysis., Develop verbal and written skills via in-class discussion, presentations, and written assignments., Learn to represent complex relationships quantitatively and conduct high-dimensional data analyses using statistical programming., Learn methods for avoiding over-fitting in high-dimensional data analysis., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: HD 6760 or GOVT 6029 or SOC 6020 or equivalent.

class: SOC 6660
class title: Event History Analysis
description: Event history analysis (also known as hazard or survival analysis) is a family of methods for the study of discrete outcomes over time. Typical sociological examples are demographic events (births, deaths), entry and exit from a social status (like marriage) and structural change (such as social revolutions). This class introduces main concepts, models, and measurement issues in event history analysis, and provides students with an opportunity to gain practical familiarity with these methods. 

class: SOC 6910
class title: Independent Study
description: For graduates who wish to obtain research experience or to do extensive reading on a special topic. Permission to enroll for independent study is granted only to students who present an acceptable prospectus and secure the agreement of a faculty member to serve as supervisor for the project throughout the semester.

class: SOC 8910
class title: Graduate Research
description: Work with a faculty member on a project that is related to your dissertation work.

class: SOC 8950
class title: Thesis Research
description: Work with chair of your committee on your dissertation work.

class: SPAN 1120
class title: Elementary Spanish: Review and Continuation
description: While building language proficiency and accuracy through communicative activities, the course encourages students to actively interact with one another. The instructor facilitates communication and provides feedback and language learning strategies that guide students to take responsibility for their own learning and become active participants in the process. The course also introduces students to the many peoples and cultures of the Spanish-speaking world, prompting them to make comparisons with their own culture. Additionally, lectures provide students with opportunities to reflect on relevant grammar topics and assist students in developing language learning strategies.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: LPS 37-44.

class: SPAN 1210
class title: Elementary Spanish I
description: While building language proficiency and accuracy through communicative activities, the course encourages students to actively interact with one another. The instructor facilitates communication and provides feedback and language learning strategies that guide students to take responsibility of their own learning and become active participants in the process. The course also introduces students to the many peoples and cultures of the Spanish-speaking world, prompting them to make comparisons with their own culture. Additionally, lectures provide students with opportunities to reflect on relevant grammar topics and assist students in developing language learning strategies. Class discussions are conducted entirely in Spanish. After 1210 students may take SPAN 1120 (fall) or SPAN 1220 (spring).
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: students with no previous knowledge of Spanish, up to two years of high school Spanish, LPS score lower than 37.

class: SPAN 1230
class title: Continuing Spanish
description: SPAN 1230 is the third course in the Spanish language sequence. It is designed to help students progress from the "novice high" level to the "intermediate mid" level in speaking, listening, reading and writing.  The course is structured around four thematic units: fashion and art; the natural world; personal relationships; and health. In each unit, we will learn the vocabulary and grammar constructions that are necessary to talk about the unit's topic. Particular emphasis will be placed on the skill of giving and defending opinions. Throughout the semester, we will discuss and analyze a wide variety of art from the Hispanic world, including songs, fashion, visual arts, TV shows, films, performance art, newspaper articles, documentaries, film shorts and podcasts. The overall goal of this course is to develop students' ability to comprehend authentic materials in Spanish and formulate nuanced opinions about those materials.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 1120, SPAN 1220, or LPS 45-55.

class: SPAN 1502
class title: Conversational Skills for Spanish in Global Contexts
description: This innovative course focuses on basic oral communication in Spanish. Emphasis is placed on developing speaking and listening skills and strategies in a culturally relevant context. It is intended for students with limited or no knowledge of Spanish and active class participation is required.

class: SPAN 2070
class title: Intermediate Spanish for the Medical and Health Professions
description: Provides a conversational grammar review, with dialogues, debates, compositions, and authentic readings on health-related themes. Special attention is given to relevant cultural differences and how cultural notions may affect medical care and communication between doctor and patient. The objective of 2070 is to provide practice in real-life application, such as taking a medical history, calming a patient, and how to speak to a Hispanic patient in a culturally acceptable manner. After this course, a student may take or SPAN 2095.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 1230, LPS 56-64, Q on CASE exam.

class: SPAN 2090
class title: Intermediate Spanish I (Composition and Conversation)
description: This intermediate course develops accurate and idiomatic oral and written expression in a cultural context. Students achieve a higher level of syntactical and lexical competence through reading and discussing literary texts and viewing films. Particular emphasis is on writing and editing academic essays with peer/instructor feedback. Classes are in Spanish and the language is actively used in oral presentations and communicative, creative, and critical-thinking activities. Students review grammar structures on their own, with clarification and support of the instructor. After this course, students may take SPAN 2095.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 1230, or LPS 56-64, or CASE Q.

class: SPAN 2095
class title: Spanish Intermediate Composition and Conversation II
description: This advanced-intermediate course is designed to prepare students for study abroad and is required for any Cornell CASA program in a Spanish speaking country.  It also serves as an entryway into the major, and advanced-level courses. Students study stylistics, analyze and discuss texts, view films, and acquire advanced reading strategies. Continued emphasis is on writing and editing academic essays with peer and instructor feedback. Classes are in Spanish, and the language is actively used in oral presentations and communicative, creative, and critical-thinking activities. Students review grammar structures on their own, although the instructor may clarify as needed.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2070, SPAN 2090, or CASE Q+.

class: SPAN 2140
class title: Modern Spanish Survey
description: Introductory survey of modern Spanish literature. Students develop their analytical skills and learn basic literary concepts such as genre (drama, lyric, short story, and novel) and style (romanticism, realism, etc.) as well as male/female perspectives and the translation of literature to film language. The survey introduces students to Spain's cultural complexity through readings of works by authors representative of its diverse linguistic and literary traditions.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095 , or CASE Q++.

class: SPAN 2150
class title: Contemporary Latin American Survey
description: Readings and discussion of representative texts of the 19th and 20th centuries from various regions of Latin America. Among the authors considered are Sarmiento, Hernández, Martí, Darío, Agustini, Cortázar, García Márquez, Poniatowska, and Valenzuela.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095, or CASE Q++.

class: SPAN 2170
class title: Early Modern Iberian Survey
description: This course explores major texts and themes of the Hispanic tradition from the 11th to the 17th centuries. We will examine general questions on literary analysis and the relationship between literature and history around certain events, such as medieval multicultural Iberia, the creation of the Spanish Inquisition in the 15th century and the expulsion of the Jews in 1492; the encounter between the Old and the New Worlds; the 'opposition' of high and low in popular culture, and of the secular and the sacred in poetry and prose. Readings may be drawn from medieval short stories and miracle collections; chivalric romances, Columbus, Lazarillo de Tormes, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Calderón, and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, among others.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095, or CASE Q++.

class: SPAN 2180
class title: Advanced Spanish Writing Workshop
description: This course, which is required for the major, is designed to help the learner develop increased accuracy and sophistication in writing in Spanish for academic purposes and continued oral practice in Spanish. To this end, there will be ample writing and revising practice, with a focus on specific grammatical and lexical areas, customized to the needs of the students enrolled in the course.  All writing will be based on a particular theme relating to Latin America with a focus on film, literary texts, newspaper readings and conducting an interview.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095 or CASE Q++ or permission of instructor required.

class: SPAN 2230
class title: Perspectives on Spain
description: This course offers a broad introduction to modern and contemporary Spanish culture of the late 19 - early 21 centuries. Throughout the semester we will examine key works from various cultural genres, with particular emphasis on the visual arts, including film, painting, photography, poetry, documentary, newsreels, theater, and architecture, with the main objective being to explore diverse perspectives that are all unique to the ever-evolving place we call "Spain." Additional topics of study include: empire and nation-state formation, Generación '98, intellectual literary and artistic movements, architectural movements and styles, dictatorship and democracy, folklore and tradition, Catholicism, fascism, revolutionary aesthetics, the politics of censorship, modernization, la Apertura, counter-cultural movements (such as the NCE-nuevo cine español and La movida), gender and identity, Francoism, nationalisms and regionalisms, and the politics of Historical Memory.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (FL-AG)

class: SPAN 2235
class title: Perspectives on Spain in Spanish
description: This course offers a broad introduction to modern and contemporary Spanish culture of the late 19 - early 21 centuries. Throughout the semester we will examine key works from various cultural genres, with particular emphasis on the visual arts, including film, painting, photography, poetry, documentary, newsreels, theater, and architecture, with the main objective being to explore diverse perspectives that are all unique to the ever-evolving place we call "Spain." Additional topics of study include: empire and nation-state formation, Generación '98, intellectual literary and artistic movements, architectural movements and styles, dictatorship and democracy, folklore and tradition, Catholicism, fascism, revolutionary aesthetics, the politics of censorship, modernization, la Apertura, counter-cultural movements (such as the NCE-nuevo cine español and La movida), gender and identity, Francoism, nationalisms and regionalisms, and the politics of Historical Memory.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS, SCD-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095 or CASE Q++ or permission of instructor required.

class: SPAN 3020
class title: Spanish Language Across the Curriculum (LAC)
description: This 1-credit optional course aims to expand the students' vocabulary, and advance their speaking and reading skills as well as enhance their knowledge and deepen their cultural understanding by supplementing non-language courses throughout the University.

class: SPAN 3539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: SPAN 3675
class title: Diasporas, Disasters, and Dissent: Re-Thinking Puerto Rican Studies in the 20th and 21st Centuries
description: "Foreign in a domestic sense" is the perplexing way that the Supreme Court of the United States chose to define Puerto Rico's status in the so-called "Insular Cases" of the early 20th century. Written over 100 years ago, this contradictory ruling looms large over Puerto Rico's precarious legal standing, despite the fact that there are now more Puerto Ricans living on the US mainland than in the island itself. Seeking to counter the obfuscation of Puerto Rico in the US imaginary, in this course students will analyze how key historical, political, and social moments connected to diasporas, disasters, and dissent have galvanized Puerto Rican cultural production in the 20th and 21st centuries.
distribution categories: (GLC-AS) (CA-AG)

class: SPAN 3710
class title: Latin American Documentary
description: Documentaries are born out of the necessity to capture the real and to tell a truth.  When we watch documentaries, we tend to comfortably rely on that claim and, often, take what they teach us as indisputable evidence of what reality is.  In this course, we will put into questions the "reality" that documentaries portray-and the possibility itself of portraying reality-by discussing a selection of Latin American documentaries that raise important issues regarding the ethics and politics of representation. In our discussions, we will critically engage with the boundaries of the cinematic frame and debate the ethical responsibilities of the filmmaker, the value and the political and social impact of the image, the role of the spectator, and the implications of filming and being filmed by an "other".
distribution categories: (ETM-AS) (KCM-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2140, SPAN 2150, SPAN 2170, SPAN 2180, or CASE Q++, or permission of instructor.

class: SPAN 3760
class title: Thought, Praxis and Way of Life in South America's Andean Region
description: This course aims at introducing students to the core elements of the thought, praxis and way of life of one of the key bastions of indigenous resistance in the New World since Columbus's arrival in 1492: South America's Andean region. We will study the region's key cultural categories, following Cuzqueñan poet and thinker Odi Gonzales's claim that any study of the region requires taking these categories as starting point. These include questions of time, space, life, death, society, religion, number, and gender. We will study how these categories are formed in tension, syncretism and co-transformation with other languages and cultures—especially Spanish—over centuries of colonial and neocolonial domination. Primary material examined include films, photography, drama, novels, poetry, testimonies, and religious texts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2095.

class: SPAN 4190
class title: Special Topics in Spanish Literature
description: Guided independent study of special topics. For undergraduates interested in special problems not covered in courses.

class: SPAN 4290
class title: Honors Work I
description: Consult director of undergraduate studies for more information.

class: SPAN 4765
class title: Latin American Food Studies
description: This course explores the relationship between food and culture in Latin America. It asks what we eat and why, and in what contexts. We will examine how colonialism and globalization have shifted consumption patterns in Latin America, as well as the environmental implications of different agricultural practices. Students will whet their appetites with a variety of literary texts, films, and images about food.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, FL-AG, LA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SPAN 2180.

class: SPAN 4880
class title: Clarice Lispector: Philosophy, Politics and Literature
description: What is literary creation? How does it relate to thinking, to doing, to being, to nothingness, to the cosmos?  What is its temporality, identity, spatiality/place?  What is literature's violence? Moreover, how do these questions relate to our sociopolitical realities,including questions of gender, class and race?  These are just a few problems that one of the greatest women writers (and thinkers) of the twentieth century, the Brazilian author Clarice Lispector, invites us to pose anew.  In this course, we will dive deeply into her works, embracing the challenge of bridging the philosophical and the political through the literary, and doing so from the sociocultural complexities of twentieth-century Brazil.  Alongside reading her works, we will watch film adaptations and trace cultural, literary and philosophical resonances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: SPAN 6180
class title: Affect-Afecto
description: The publication of 2010 of The Affect Theory Reader, edited by Melissa Gregg and Gregory J. Seigworth, officially marked the consolidation of the "Affect Theory Turn," a turn triggered by the debates and discussions around a vast interdisciplinary corpus that challenged a view of the subject as individual and self-contained, as if focused on the intensities that pass between bodies and the "bindings and unbindings", becomings and un-becomings, jarring disorientations and rhythmic attunements" they provoked. The Affect Reader 2, published in 2023 and edited by Seigworth and Carolyn Pedwell, raised new questions that considered both the potentialities and limitations of affect theory and how it has changed in the last decade.  This course takes these debates and questions and puts them in conversation with theoretical, literary, and artistic works that, grounded in Latin America, both challenge and expand our understanding of affect by introducing the cultural, linguistic, political, and social nuances of afecto.

class: SPAN 6224
class title: Beauty, Grief
description: This course is for anyone drawn to beauty-and anyone who, within the beautiful, finds the trace of a loss. What do we grieve, what do we miss, when we find ourselves in the presence of beauty? And what, in every retrospective, prospective or otherwise non-present beauty, do we nonetheless crave and nonetheless mourn? What is the beauty hidden within mourning? We'll take a look at thinkers, poets, and artists from both modern and premodern culture, potentially including Anne Carson, Augustine of Hippo, Fra Angelico, Gillian Rose, Hervé Guibert, Pepe Espáliu, and others, as we try to sit with dual summons of beauty and grief: beauty or grief.

class: SPAN 6390
class title: Special Topics in Spanish Literature
description: Guided independent study of specific topics. For graduate students interested in special problems not covered in courses.

class: SPAN 6539
class title: Islamic Spain: Culture and Society
description: This course examines the culture and society of al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) from 711, when Islam arrived in Iberia, until 1492 and the demise of Nasrid Granada. Through extensive discussion and analysis of Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew primary documents and literary texts of various genres (in translation), the course challenges ideological bases of conventional thinking regarding the social, political, and cultural identity of medieval "Spain." Among other things, the class investigates the origins of lyric poetry, the relationships among the various confessional and ethnic communities in al-Andalus and the problems involved in Mozarabic Christian and Andalusi Jewish subcultural adaptations of Andalusi Arabo-Islamic culture.

class: STS 1126
class title: FWS: Science and Society Topics
description: This seminar explores the ways in which Science and Society shape one another and provides the opportunity to write extensively about this mutual shaping. Topics vary by section.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: STS 1201
class title: Information Ethics, Law, and Policy
description: This course investigates the ethical, legal, and policy foundations of contemporary information technology. Through lectures, readings, discussions, and short assignments, we will address contemporary challenges ranging from the contests over intellectual property and privacy in a networked world to questions of inequality and control over technology. We will cover key areas of technology law and policy such as computing ethics; intellectual property; competition, antitrust, and freedom of expression; privacy and security; and AI ethics. We will also address new ethical questions and controversies that law and policy has yet to sort out. Through this course you'll learn about the key frameworks, processes, and institutions that govern the contemporary world of information technology, along with key theories and methods from academic fields that shape and inform them (law, philosophy, economics, political science, communication, sociology, etc.). You will also learn core reading and analytic skills central to success in the worlds of social science, law, policy, and many other settings. But above all you'll learn to engage critically and strategically with the worlds of information and technology around you, deciding what kind of information consumer, user, producer, and citizen you want to be.

class: STS 2051
class title: Ethical Issues in Health and Medicine
description: In the rapidly changing world of healthcare, complex ethical issues arise from interpersonal interactions between patients and clinicians to broad controversies that propel medicine into headline news. This course will examine ethical challenges in contemporary medicine, healthcare, and biomedical research from the bedside to health policy. Using case-vignettes, news stories, narratives, and readings from the healthcare, ethics, and social science literature we will examine issues from multiple vantage points. A range of topics will be explored including the patient-clinician relationship, heath care decision-making, issues at the beginning and end-of-life, technological advances, human experimentation, healthcare systems, and distributive justice. The course will also examine the fluidity of normative ethical boundaries, and how context and point of reference influence our perceptions of and approach to ethical issues. 
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, KCM-AG)

class: STS 2071
class title: Introduction to the History of Medicine
description: This course offers an introductory survey of the history of medicine (principally in Europe and the United States) from classical antiquity to the early twentieth century. Using a combination of both primary and secondary sources, students will learn about the "Hippocratic Heritage" of contemporary western medicine; medicine in late antiquity; faith and healing in the medieval period; medicine and knowledge in the Islamic world; medicine during the Renaissance (particularly the rise of the mechanical philosophy); medicine in the age of Enlightenment; professionalization, women-doctors and midwives, and battles over 'quackery' in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; the role of medicine in colonialism and empire; and the promises and perils of modern medicine (dramatic decreases in mortality on the one hand, the rise of Eugenics and the importance of Medicine to the National Socialist State on the other). As well as this temporal survey, we will consider a number of ongoing themes: race, bodily difference, and medicine; medicine and the environment; women, gender, and medicine; the history of the body; the history of sexuality; and the close connections between forms of social order and forms of medical knowledge. The course meets three times a week (for two lectures and a section) and is open to all.
distribution categories: (HST-AS) (HA-AG)

class: STS 2207
class title: East Asian Medical and Martial Arts
description: East Asian medicinal and martial arts, whether practiced in East Asia or in other parts of the world, have been important points of contact for people within and between often marginalized communities. In this course we will study the twentieth century development of East Asian combat and healing traditions, and the transport of those disciplines to the U.S. We will examine the personal, community, national, and global stakes of East Asian arts for those who invest in suppressing, teaching, and practicing them. We will consider how East Asian martial and medical practices relate, for example, to global and local histories of orientalism, colonialism, migration, and racism, and to historical post-colonial, anti-racist, feminist, and LGBTQ movements. Over the course of the semester, we will research martial and medical arts as they have been practiced in Ithaca, and place these local histories into their broader historical contexts.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: STS 2561
class title: Medicine and Healing in China
description: An exploration of processes of change in health care practices in China. Focuses on key transitions, such as the emergence of canonical medicine, of Daoist approaches to healing and longevity, of "scholar physicians," and of "traditional Chinese medicine" in modern China. Inquries into the development of healing practices in relation to both popular and specialist views of the body and disease; health care as organized by individuals, families, communities, and states; the transmission of medical knowledge; and healer-patient relations. Course readings include primary texts in translation as well as secondary materials.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: STS 3020
class title: Science Writing for the Media
description: How to write about science, technology, and medicine for the media. Writing assignments focus on writing news for web sites, blogs, magazines, and other media.
outcome: Students will be able to define science news., Students will be able to identify audiences for science news and target your writing to them., Students will be able to write basic science news stories., Students will be able to report and write science feature stories., Students will be able to explain key constraints on and opportunities for science journalism, including changes in science journalism as it adapts to a new media world., Students will be able to investigate current topics of concern to the science journalism community., Students will be able to discuss the social context in which science journalism operates., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG, WRT-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: completion at least one college-level writing course.

class: STS 3311
class title: Environmental Governance
description: Environmental governance is defined as the assemblage of institutions that regulate society-nature interactions and shape environmental outcomes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. Institutions, broadly defined, are mechanisms of social coordination including laws (formal) and social norms (informal) that guide the behavior of individuals. Participants in the course will explore the roles of governments, markets, and collective action in environmental management and mismanagement. We will emphasize interactions among leading environmental policy strategies: public regulation, market-based incentives, and community-based resource management. The course is focused around a set of analytic perspectives. These theoretical frameworks allow us to synthesize empirical observations and material changes in ways that inform our understanding of contemporary evolution of environmental policy and management.
outcome: Students will gain familiarity with the concepts, theories, and applications of institutional analysis applied to environment., Students will develop critical awareness of the strengths and weakness of states, markets, and collective structures as resources for social regulation., Students will develop an historical appreciation of environmental policy in order to reflect critically on contemporary status and trends., Students will develop an interdisciplinary understanding of environmental policy through exploration of economic, sociological, and political scientific perspectives., Students will be exposed to a broad range of environmental problems and policy and management responses. Coverage includes national and international cases, and analyses at multiple scales., Students will develop capacity to conduct institutional analysis including the specification of a research question, policy research, synthesis, and communication., Students will build generic competencies including reading of scientific and popular texts, writing, oral communication, group work, and critical analysis., 
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: STS 3474
class title: Infrastructure
description: Infrastructure! It's the hardware and software that undergirds transportation, energy, water, and security systems. This course asks what we can learn about infrastructure when we approach it not as a neutral set of technologies but as a context-dependent social and political force. Taking a critical approach to (among others) natural resources, labor, housing, and security, the course will trace how infrastructures have both served and obstructed colonial and contemporary projects for social change.
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ANTHR 1101. Recommended prerequisite: ANTHR 3000.

class: STS 3650
class title: History and Theory of Digital Art
description: In this course, we will examine the role of electronic and digital technologies in the arts of the late 20th and 21st centuries with emphasis on Europe and North America. Beginning with the cybernetically and systems-inspired work of the late sixties, we will explore early uses of computer technology, including early experiments in synthetic video in the 1970s. An overview of pre-internet telematic experiments will lead to an investigation of net art and later currents of digital art. The ongoing development of behavioral art forms will be a central theme. Critical evaluation of various attitudes concerning technology will be encouraged.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: STS 3651
class title: Freud and Psychoanalysis
description: Psychoanalysis considers the human being not as an object of treatment, but as a subject who is called upon to elaborate an unconscious knowledge about what is disrupting her life, through analysis of dreams, symptoms, bungled actions, slips of the tongue, and repetitive behaviors.  Freud finds that these apparently irrational acts and behavior are ordered by the logic of the fantasy, which provides a mental representation of a traumatic childhood experience and the effects it unleashes in the mind and body-effects he called drives.  As "unbound" energies, the drives give rise to symptoms, repetitive acts, and fantasmatic stagings that menace our health and sometimes threaten social coexistence, but that also rise to the desires, creative acts, and social projects we identify as the essence of human life.  Readings will include fundamental texts on the unconscious, repression, fantasy, and the death drive, as well as case studies and speculative essays on mythology, art, religion, and group psychology.  Students will be asked to keep a dream journal and to work on their unconscious formations, and will have the chance to produce creative projects as well as analytic essays.
distribution categories: (ETM-AS, SSC-AS) (KCM-AG, SBA-AG)

class: STS 3991
class title: Undergraduate Independent Study
description: Applications for research projects are accepted by individual STS faculty members. Students may enroll for 1–4 credits in STS 3991 with written permission of the faculty supervisor and may elect either the letter grade or the S–U option. Information on faculty research, scholarly activities, and undergraduate opportunities are available in the Science &amp; Technology Studies office, 303 Morrill Hall. Independent study credits may not be used in completion of the major requirements.

class: STS 4168
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.
distribution categories: (HST-AS, SCD-AS) (D-AG, HA-AG)

class: STS 4240
class title: Designing Technology for Social Impact
description: The social impact of technologies is typically thought about fairly late, if ever, in the design process. Indeed, it can be difficult at design time to predict what effects technologies will have. Nevertheless, design decisions can inadvertently "lock in" particular values early on. In this course, we will draw on science &amp; technology studies, technology design, and the arts to analyze the values embodied in technology design and to design technologies to promote positive social impact. What social and cultural values do technology designs consciously or unconsciously promote? To what degree can social impact be "built into" a technology? How can we take social and cultural values into account in design?
distribution categories: (SSC-AS) (SBA-AG)

class: STS 4442
class title: Toxicity
description: Identifying and managing the toxic is critical to medical and environmental sciences as well as techniques of governing and resisting. This course takes up the subject of toxicity as a field of expertise, an object of knowledge and ethical substance. We will consider the specific histories of industrialization and of the sciences that shape modern engagements with toxicity, and we will explore other ways that the sorts of harms, poisons, and powers glossed as toxicity have been articulated. Over the course of the semester, students will develop the skills to provincalizing relations between toxicity, remedy and memory. Texts will draw from social theory, anthropology, science and technology studies and history as well as art and activism.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a previous class in the humanities or interpretive social sciences, preferably in anthropology or science and technology studies.

class: STS 4991
class title: Honors Project I
description: Students must register for 4 credits each semester (4991-4992) for a total of 8 credits. After the first semester, students receive a letter grade of "R"; a letter grade for both semesters is submitted at the end of the second semester whether or not the student completes a thesis or is recommended for honors. Minimally, an honors thesis outline and bibliography should be completed during the first semester. In consultation with the advisors, the director of undergraduate studies will evaluate whether the student should continue working on an honors project. Students should note that these courses are to be taken in addition to those courses that meet the regular major requirements. If students do not complete the second semester of the honors project, they must change the first semester to independent study to clear the "R" and receive a grade. Otherwise, the "R" will remain on their record and prevent them from graduating.

class: STS 4992
class title: Honors Project II
description: Students must register for the 4 credits each semester (BSOC 4991-BSOC 4992) for a total of 8 credits. After the first semester, students receive a letter grade of "R"; a letter grade for both semesters is submitted at the end of the second semester whether or not the student completes a thesis or is recommended for honors. Minimally, an honors thesis outline and bibliography should be completed during the first semester. In consultation with the advisors, the director of undergraduate studies will evaluate whether the student should continue working on an honors project. Students should note that these courses are to be taken in addition to those courses that meet the regular major requirements. If students do not complete the second semester of the honors project, they must change the first semester to independent  study to clear the "R" and receive a grade. Otherwise, the "R" will remain on their record and prevent them from graduating.

class: STS 6168
class title: Race and Asia in World History
description: This course explores the development of the concept of "race" as applied by and to Asian populations and societies. We also examine the idea of "Asia" and its others in global discourse, including through lenses such as Orientalism, Occidentalism, Pan-Asianism, and Afro-Asianism. Our focus is on the history of East Asia and trans-Pacific entanglements with Western empires from the early modern era to the present. A major theme is race science, or the scientific investigation and construction of "race," as it was practiced on and by East Asian peoples. We also explore intersections of "race" with nationalism, imperialism, warfare, law and citizenship, and sex and the family.

class: STS 6261
class title: Seminar in the History of Technology
description: Graduate-level survey of the history of technology, which introduces some key questions, concepts, and approaches within the field since the 1980s. Typical themes include social construction of technology; technological systems and infrastructure; technopolitics; race, class, genders, disability, and technology; users; envirotech; maintenance and repair; colonialism and decolonizing technology; and public and engaged #histtech.

class: STS 6312
class title: Synthesizing Pop: Electronics and the Musical Imagination
description: From Switched-On Bach to Synthpop and EDM, since the late 1960s electronic synthesizers have expanded the sonic palette and identity formation of popular musicians, leading to new concepts of sound and performance as well as communal, technological, and human interfaces. This course will explore the cultural history of analog synthesizers and their progeny of digital devices (samplers, sequencers, drum machines) and desktop technologies that revolutionized popular music soundscapes and embodiment. Synthesis will be considered as both a musical technology and theoretical concept that together spark imagined cyborg identities and post-human futures, challenging and resynthesizing categories of gender, sexuality, and race. Student will also have the opportunity to engage with Cornell's Robert Moog Archive and develop research, creative, or curation projects. This course is open to graduate students and fourth-year undergraduates by permission. Undergraduates should contact the instructor before enrolling.

class: STS 6445
class title: German Media Theories
description: This seminar examines German media theories from the Frankfurt School to the Kittler Network and beyond. We will discuss influential concepts associated with this work (e.g., the culture industry, the public sphere, discourse networks), along with related concepts in media and cultural studies (e.g., space and time, analog and digital, old and new media). Theoretical readings address questions about media aesthetics, intermediality, and media change; automation, mechanization, and standardization; and communication, command, and control. Engaging with scholarly debates about interdisciplinarity and theory transfer, we will also revisit and revise reductive stereotypes about media critique, technological determinism, and the "Germanness" of German media theories.

class: STS 6474
class title: Infrastructure
description: Infrastructure! It's the hardware and software that undergirds transportation, energy, water, and security systems. This course asks what we can learn about infrastructure when we approach it not as a neutral set of technologies but as a context-dependent social and political force. Taking a critical approach to (among others) natural resources, labor, housing, and security, the course will trace how infrastructures have both served and obstructed colonial and contemporary projects for social change.

class: STS 6991
class title: Graduate Independent Study
description: Applications and information are available in 303 Morrill Hall.

class: STS 7005
class title: STS Perspectives
description: This one-credit seminar is designed to introduce PhD students in Science &amp; Technology Studies (STS) to the faculty in the STS graduate field and their scholarly interests and work. Faculty members will be invited to lead one week of the course during the fall semester. Course leaders will set the agenda for their week (e.g., discussing a reading of their choice, introducing their research agenda, or discussing emerging issues the field). Reading assignments will be minimal; no more than 40 pages each week.

class: STS 7006
class title: STS Research I: A Course for Second-Year PhD Students in the Field
description: The goal of this year-long course is to train students in the process of conducting research in STS, providing hands on experience and discussions of the research process. Students will plan and execute an appropriately scaled empirical research project in STS and complete a "second-year paper" by the end of the Spring semester. They will refine initial research concepts into more specific research questions; review literature relevant to their topic; identify data sources and collect data and materials; address research ethics and obtain IRB approval (if needed); manage the inevitable contingencies of research; and write and revise their second-year papers.

class: STS 7111
class title: Introduction to Science and Technology Studies
description: Provides students with a foundation in the field of science and technology studies. Using classic works as well as contemporary exemplars, seminar participants chart the terrain of this new field. Topics for discussion include, but are not limited to, historiography of science and technology and their relation to social studies of science and technology, laboratory studies, intellectual property, science and the state, the role of instruments, fieldwork, politics and technical knowledge, philosophy of science, sociological studies of science and technology, and popularization.

class: STS 7442
class title: Toxicity
description: Identifying and managing the toxic is critical to medical and environmental sciences as well as techniques of governing and resisting. This course takes up the subject of toxicity as a field of expertise, an object of knowledge and ethical substance. We will consider the specific histories of industrialization and of the sciences that shape modern engagements with toxicity, and we will explore other ways that the sorts of harms, poisons, and powers glossed as toxicity have been articulated. Over the course of the semester, students will develop the skills to provincalizing relations between toxicity, remedy and memory. Texts will draw from social theory, anthropology, science and technology studies and history as well as art and activism. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: a previous class in the humanities or interpretive social sciences, preferably in anthropology or science and technology studies.

class: STS 7937
class title: Proseminar in Peace Studies
description: The Proseminar in Peace Studies offers a multidisciplinary review of issues related to peace and conflict at the graduate level. The course is led by the director of the Judith Reppy Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies and is based on the Institute's weekly seminar series, featuring outside visitors and Cornell faculty. 

class: STSCI 2100
class title: Introductory Statistics and Data Science
description: Statistics is about understanding the world through data. We are surrounded by data, so there is a lot to understand. Covers data exploration and display, data gathering methods, probability, and statistical inference methods through contingency tables and linear regression. The emphasis is on thinking scientifically, understanding what is commonly done with data (and doing some of it for yourself), and laying a foundation for further study. Students learn to use statistical software and simulation tools to discover fundamental results. They use computers regularly; the test includes both multimedia materials and a software package. This course does not focus on data from any particular discipline, but will use real-world examples from a wide variety of disciplines and current events.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory algebra.

class: STSCI 2110
class title: Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II
description: A second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2100 or equivalent introductory statistics course.

class: STSCI 2120
class title: Introduction to R Programming
description: The course will cover the basics of R programming for reading and writing data, executing simple operations on data, performing basic analyses, and producing visual graphics. An emphasis will be placed on practical aspects and understanding of fundamental R objects and functions. 
outcome: Describe and operate on basic R data structures such as vectors, matrices, and data frames., Access and get help from R documentation., Read and write data from and to CSV and RData formats., Visualize data using basic R graphics capabilities., Calculate statistics from data and print results in a readable format., 

class: STSCI 2130
class title: Applied Regression Analysis
description: This seven week, two-credit class will cover the regression requirements, hypothesis tests, and interpretation of results. Students will learn to identify the data necessary to perform a regression analysis, evaluate the conditions, and apply the statistical tests. Interpretation of overall results will be made. Independent/group projects by each student will be done. These will consist of identifying an issue of interest, a relevant data set, and analysis using the regression methods. Presentation of the results in verbal and written form will be required. Recommended for students who want to develop applied analysis skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ILRST 2100 or equivalent.

class: STSCI 2150
class title: Introductory Statistics for Biology
description: This course provides an introduction to data analysis and statistical inference illustrated with biological applications. The computer labs will teach graphical analysis and statistical computation using R. Topics include graphical display, populations and sampling, probability distributions, expectation and variance, estimation, testing, correlation, regression, contingency tables, and the design of experiments. Emphasis is on concepts and the careful modeling of biological data, so that statistical methods are applied properly, pitfalls are avoided, and sound conclusions are reached.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)

class: STSCI 2200
class title: Statistics I
description: Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, and linear regression.
outcome: Students will be able to design an experiment using randomization techniques., Students will be able to use R Markdown for reproducible research., Students will be able to produce effective graphical summaries of collected data., Students will learn how sampling distributions are determined and utilized for statistical analysis., Students will understand why some estimators are more desirable than others., Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, ANOVA, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, linear regression, and multiple linear regression., Students will be able to assess the quality of a statistical analysis., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of calculus.

class: STSCI 3040
class title: R Programming for Data Science
description: Statistics courses usually use clean and well-behaved data, this leaves many unprepared for the messiness and chaos of data in the real world. This course aims to prepare students for dealing with data using the R programming language.  The introduction will overview the basic R syntax, foundational R programming concepts such as data types, vectors arithmetic, and indexing, and importing data into R from different file formats.  The data wrangling topics include how to tidy data using the tidy verse to better facilitate analysis, string processing with regular expressions and with dates and times as file formats, web scraping, and text mining. Data visualization topics will cover visualization principles, the use of ggplot2 to create custom plots, and how to communicate data-driven findings.
outcome: Learn basic R syntax, foundational R programming concepts such as data types, vectors arithmetic, and indexing, and importing data into R from different file formats., Learn data wrangling topics include how to tidy data using the tidy verse., Produce professional and informative data visualizations., Use R Markdown to create reports to document data analysis and communicate findings., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ECON 3110/STSCI 3110, ENGRD 2700.

class: STSCI 3080
class title: Probability Models and Inference
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, the method of moments, sampling distributions and confidence intervals.
outcome: Students will be able to manipulate random variables and their distributions using differential and integral calculus., Students will be able to derive properties of standard probability., Students will be able to derive maximum likelihood estimators for standard probability distributions and discuss their properties., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200 or their equivalents. MATH 1120 or equivalent and MATH 2220 or equivalent. 

class: STSCI 3100
class title: Statistical Sampling
description: Theory and application of statistical sampling, especially in regard to sample design, cost, estimation of population quantities, and error estimation. Assessment of nonsampling errors. Discussion of applications to social and biological sciences and to business problems. 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: STSCI 3110
class title: Probability Models and Inference for the Social Sciences
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS, SMR-AS) (MQL-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1110 or equivalent.

class: STSCI 3740
class title: Data Mining and Machine Learning
description: We start off with a detailed refresher for Linear Regression. We then turn to popular methods for classification including Logistic Regression and Discriminant Analysis. Finally, we consider more advanced topics which may include - depending on the audience - Resampling Methods, Tree-based Methods, or Support Vector Machines. The statistics software R is introduced and used for applications.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1112 or equivalent, MATH 2220, STSCI 3200, STSCI 3080 or MATH 4710.

class: STSCI 3900
class title: Causal Inference
description: Causal claims are essential in both science and policy. Would a new experimental drug improve disease survival? Would a new advertisement cause higher sales? Would a person's income be higher if they finished college? These questions involve counterfactuals: outcomes that would be realized if a treatment were assigned differently. This course will define counterfactuals mathematically, formalize conceptual assumptions that link empirical evidence to causal conclusions, and engage with statistical methods for estimation. Students will enter the course with knowledge of statistical inference: how to assess if a variable is associated with an outcome. Students will emerge from the course with knowledge of causal inference: how to assess whether an intervention to change that input would lead to a change in the outcome.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2100 or PSYCH 2500 or SOC 3010 or ECON 3110 or equivalent.

class: STSCI 4030
class title: Linear Models with Matrices
description: The focus of this course is the theory and application of the general linear model expressed in its matrix form. Topics will include: least squares estimation, multiple linear regression, coding for categorical predictors, residual diagnostics, anova decomposition, polynomial regression, model selection techniques, random effects and mixed models, maximum likelihood estimation and distributional theory assuming normal errors. Homework assignments will involve computation using the R statistical package.
outcome: Students will be able to discuss the mathematical foundations of linear statistical models using matrix algebra., Students will be able to use diagnostic measures to assess the validity of a given statistical model., Students will be able to analyze data involving both fixed and random factors., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, BTRY 3080 or equivalent, MATH 1920 or equivalent, MATH 2210 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: STSCI 4060
class title: Python Programming and its Applications in Statistics
description: The first part of the course teaches basic Python programming knowledge and skills, such as Python variables, data containers, language controls, functions, objects, class, data structures, regular expressions, graphics, GUI, Jupyter notebook, etc. The second part deals with Python application in statistics (e.g., 2D/3D data visualization and statistical analysis, using some important Python packages for statistical computing and machine learning, for example, Numpy, Scipy, Pandas, and Scikit-learn, etc.) Python-database integration (e.g., access, update and control an Oracle database), and Python web services (e.g., database-driven dynamic webpages using Python CGI scripts). These techniques are utilized in a comprehensive course project.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic programming skills (any language), one introductory Statistics course, SQL (Oracle preferred).

class: STSCI 4090
class title: Theory of Statistics
description: Introduction to classical theory of parametric statistical inference that builds on the material covered in BTRY 3080. Topics include: sampling distributions, principles of data reduction, likelihood, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, interval estimation, and basic asymptotic theory.
outcome: Describe the general principles of statistical estimation and testing., Design a statistical estimator in a principled way based on a description of a dataset., Analyze the theoretical properties of an estimator and a hypothesis test., Calculate and correctly interpret confidence intervals, p-values, statistical significance, and power., Recognize the general principles underlying common statistical procedures., 
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710, or equivalent and at least one introductory statistics course.

class: STSCI 4110
class title: Categorical Data
description: Categorical data analysis, including logistic regression, log-linear models, stratified tables, matched pairs analysis, polytomous response, and ordinal data. Applications in biological, biomedical and social sciences.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3020, BTRY 6020, or equivalent with BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710 also highly recommended.

class: STSCI 4630
class title: Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering
description: Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation, and optimization.
distribution categories: (SDS-AS) (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: engineering math through MATH 2940, ENGRD 2700 and ORIE 3500, and knowledge of R and multiple linear regression equivalent to ORIE 3120. No previous knowledge of finance required.

class: STSCI 4970
class title: Undergraduate Supervised Teaching
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training. Students meet with a discussion or laboratory section and regularly discuss objectives with the course instructor.

class: STSCI 4980
class title: Tutorial in Actuarial Statistics
description: Problem solving sessions to prepare students for the first four actuarial examinations (probability, financial mathematics, statistical modeling, and risk management).

class: STSCI 4990
class title: Undergraduate Individual Study in Statistics
description: Course consists of individual tutorial study selected by faculty. Because topics usually change year to year this course may be repeated for credit.

class: STSCI 4995
class title: Internship in Data Science
description: Students planning internships related to Statistics and Data Science are encouraged to enroll in the departmental internship course.
outcome: Demonstrate professional skills that pertain directly to the internship experience., Demonstrate verbal and written communication skills.  Participate well as a team member and build professional network., Demonstrate effect management of personal behavior, ethics and attitudes., 

class: STSCI 4999
class title: Undergraduate Dissertation Research
description: Research at the undergraduate level.

class: STSCI 5030
class title: Linear Models with Matrices
description: The focus of this course is the theory and application of the general linear model expressed in its matrix form. Topics will include: least squares estimation, multiple linear regression, coding for categorical predictors, residual diagnostics, anova decomposition, polynomial regression, model selection techniques, random effects and mixed models, maximum likelihood estimation and distributional theory assuming normal errors. Homework assignments will involve computation using the R statistical package.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, BTRY 3080 or equivalent, MATH 1920 or equivalent, MATH 2210 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: STSCI 5040
class title: R Programming for Data Science
description: Statistics courses usually use clean and well-behaved data, this leaves many unprepared for the messiness and chaos of data in the real world. This course aims to prepare students for dealing with data using the R programming language.  The introduction will overview the basic R syntax, foundational R programming concepts such as data types, vectors arithmetic, and indexing, and importing data into R from different file formats.  The data wrangling topics include how to tidy data using the tidy verse to better facilitate analysis, string processing with regular expressions and with dates and times as file formats, web scraping, and text mining. Data visualization topics will cover visualization principles, the use of ggplot2 to create custom plots, and how to communicate data-driven findings.
outcome: Learn basic R syntax, foundational R programming concepts such as data types, vectors arithmetic, and indexing, and importing data into R from different file formats., Learn data wrangling topics include how to tidy data using the tidy verse., Produce professional and informative data visualizations., Use R Markdown to create reports to document data analysis and communicate findings., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course.

class: STSCI 5045
class title: Python Programming and its Applications in Statistics
description: The first part of the course teaches basic Python programming knowledge and skills, such as Python variables, data containers, language controls, functions, objects, class, data structures, regular expressions, graphics, GUI, Jupyter notebook, etc. The second part deals with Python application in statistics (e.g., 2D/3D data visualization and statistical analysis, using some important Python packages for statistical computing and machine learning, for example, Numpy, Scipy, Pandas, and Scikit-learn, etc.) Python-database integration (e.g., access, update and control an Oracle database), and Python web services (e.g., database-driven dynamic webpages using Python CGI scripts). These techniques are utilized in a comprehensive course project.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 5060 (or basic SQL programming skill), and one intro statistics course.

class: STSCI 5060
class title: Database Management and SAS High Performance Computing with DBMS
description: Using relational databases in statistical computing has become more and more important. The knowledge and skill of database management and the ability to combine this knowledge and skill with statistical analysis software tools, such as SAS, are a critical qualification of a statistical analyst. In this course we will study 1) the basics of modern relational database management systems, including database analysis, design and implementation, 2) database application in advanced SAS programming and, 3) SAS high performance computing using database-related techniques.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: STSCI 5010 or Base SAS programming knowledge and skills.

class: STSCI 5080
class title: Probability Models and Inference
description: This course provides an introduction to probability and parametric inference. Topics include: random variables, standard distributions, the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem, likelihood-based estimation, sampling distributions and hypothesis testing, as well as an introduction to Bayesian methods. Some assignments may involve computation using the R programming language.
outcome: Students will be able to manipulate random variables and their distributions using differential and integral calculus., Students will be able to derive properties of standard probability., Students will be able to derive maximum likelihood estimators for standard probability distributions and discuss their properties., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent. 

class: STSCI 5090
class title: Theory of Statistics
description: Introduction to classical theory of parametric statistical inference that builds on the material covered in BTRY 3080. Topics include sampling distributions, principles of data reduction, likelihood, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, interval estimation, and basic asymptotic theory.

class: STSCI 5100
class title: Statistical Sampling
description: Theory and application of statistical sampling, especially in regard to sample design, cost, estimation of population quantities, and error estimation. Assessment of nonsampling errors. Discussion of applications to social and biological sciences and to business problems. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2150 or STSCI 2200/BTRY 3010 or equivalent, STSCI 3200/BTRY 3020 or BTRY 6020.

class: STSCI 5110
class title: Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences II
description: Second course in statistics that emphasizes applications to the social sciences. Topics include simple linear regression, multiple linear regression (theory, model building, and model diagnostics), and the analysis of variance. Computer packages are used extensively.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: STSCI 2100 or equivalent introductory statistics course.

class: STSCI 5120
class title: Introduction to R Programming
description: The course will cover the basics of R programming for reading and writing data, executing simple operations on data, performing basic analyses, and producing visual graphics. An emphasis will be placed on practical aspects and understanding of fundamental R objects and functions.

class: STSCI 5150
class title: Introductory Statistics for Biology
description: This course provides an introduction to data analysis and statistical inference illustrated with biological applications. The computer labs will teach graphical analysis and statistical computation using R. Topics include graphical display, populations and sampling, probability distributions, expectation and variance, estimation, testing, correlation, regression, contingency tables, and the design of experiments. Emphasis is on concepts and the careful modeling of biological data, so that statistical methods are applied properly, pitfalls are avoided, and sound conclusions are reached.

class: STSCI 5160
class title: Categorical Data
description: Categorical data analysis, including logistic regression, log-linear models, stratified tables, matched pairs analysis, polytomous response, and ordinal data. Applications in biological, biomedical and social sciences.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 3020, BTRY 6020, or equivalent with BTRY 3080 or MATH 4710 also highly recommended.

class: STSCI 5200
class title: Statistics I
description: Students will be able to perform a variety of basic statistical analyses including: t-tests, two-sample t-tests, tests for categorical data, and linear regression.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one semester of calculus.

class: STSCI 5630
class title: Operations Research Tools for Financial Engineering
description: Introduction to the applications of OR techniques, e.g., probability, statistics, and optimization, to finance and financial engineering. The course reviews probability and statistics and surveys assets returns, ARIMA time series models, portfolio selection using quadratic programming, regression, CAPM and factor models, option pricing, GARCH models, fixed-income securities, and resampling techniques. Covers the use of R for statistical calculations, simulation, and optimization.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2940, ENGRD 2700, ORIE 3120, ORIE 3500.

class: STSCI 5740
class title: Data Mining and Machine Learning
description: We start off with a detailed refresher for Linear Regression. We then turn to popular methods for classification including Logistic Regression and Discriminant Analysis. Finally, we consider more advanced topics which may include - depending on the audience - Resampling Methods, Tree-based Methods, or Support Vector Machines. The statistics software R is introduced and used for applications.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CS 1112 or equivalent, MATH 2220, STSCI 3200, STSCI 3080 or MATH 4710.

class: STSCI 5954
class title: Project Development and Professional Communication
description: Students will learn core professional skills required to work with a client. These skills include designing and implementing a work plan, learning to communicate efficiently, presentation of a final deliverable to the client, as well as learning good practices to conduct data analysis, documentation, quality control and collaboration. Through hands-on experience and real-world examples, students will develop a basic understanding of consulting, and be familiar with the professional standard expected in the industry.
outcome: This course will equip MPS students with the tools and techniques to work with a client in their industry project., Students will learn how to manage a project, organize team structure, communicate and collaborate., Students will learn good practice to conduct data analysis and documentation., 

class: STSCI 5990
class title: Directed Studies in Applied Statistics
description: For individual or group research projects conducted under the direction of a member of STSCI faculty or instructors in a special area of statistical science that is not covered by regular course offerings.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: multicalculus, linear algebra, and basic statistics.

class: STSCI 5995
class title: Internship in Data Science
description: Students planning internships related to Statistics and Data Science are encouraged to enroll in the departmental internship course.
outcome: Demonstrate professional skills that pertain directly to the internship experience., Demonstrate verbal and written communication skills.  Participate well as a team member and build professional network., Demonstrate effect management of personal behavior, ethics and attitudes., 

class: STSCI 6520
class title: Statistical Computing I
description: Modern statistical methods routinely used in practice for analyzing large, complex datasets require intensive computation. This course covers topics in statistical computing, including numerical optimization and finding zeros (likelihood and related techniques), random number generation and Monte Carlo methods, bootstrap and subsampling, dimension reduction, nonlinear predictive modeling and parallel computing. Programming will be done in R.
outcome: Demonstrate knowledge of specialized statistical methods., Use modern statistical software and a programming language., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: ORIE 6700 or MATH 6730, or equivalent and at least one course in probability, or permission of instructor.

class: STSCI 6740
class title: Mathematical Statistics II
description: Focuses on the foundations of statistical inference, with an emphasis on asymptotic methods and the minimax optimality criterion. In the first part, the solution of the classical problem of justifying Fisher's information bound in regular statistical models will be presented. This solution will be obtained applying the concepts of contiguity, local asymptotic normality and asymptotic minimaxity. The second part will be devoted to nonparametric estimation, taking a Gaussian regression model as a paradigmatic example. Key topics are kernel estimation and local polynomial approximation, optimal rates of convergence at a point and in global norms, and adaptive estimation. Optional topics may include irregular statistical models, estimation of functionals and nonparametric hypothesis testing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 6710 (measure theoretic probability) and STSCI 6730/MATH 6730, or permission of instructor.

class: STSCI 6940
class title: Graduate Special Topics in Statistics
description: Topics are arranged at the beginning of the semester for individual study or for group discussions. Or, students may elect to undertake a project in statistics. The work is supervised by a professor in this subject area.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 6710.

class: STSCI 6970
class title: Individual Graduate Study in Statistics
description: Individual tutorial study selected by the faculty. Because topics usually change from year to year, this course may be repeated for credit.

class: STSCI 7170
class title: Theory of Linear Models
description: Properties of the multivariate normal distribution. Distribution theory for quadratic forms. Properties of least squares and maximum likelihood estimates. Methods for fixed-effect models of less than full rank. Analysis of balanced and unbalanced mixed-effects models. Restricted maximum likelihood estimation. Some use of software packages and illustrative examples.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BTRY 4090 or MATH 4720, BTRY 6020, or equivalents.

class: STSCI 7999
class title: Graduate Level Dissertation Research
description: Research at the Ph.D. Level.

class: STSCI 9999
class title: Doctoral Level Dissertation Research
description: Doctoral Level Dissertation Research.

class: SWAHL 2101
class title: Intermediate Swahili I
description: Intermediate Swahili levels I and II in general impart speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills beyond Swahili elementary level to participate with ease and confidence in familiar topics and exchange information on unfamiliar topics. Students are assigned communicative tasks such as respond to a situation with a short text and take part in a discussion after viewing short video clips and prompts to elicit speaking and listening competence and cultural awareness responses beyond elementary level. The language and cultural scenarios practiced are designed to help students demonstrate language responses beyond familiar topics, and to feel comfortable conversing with Swahili native speakers, as well as to blend in and feel welcomed as part of the community while exploring different topics such as acquaintanceship, relationships, health, festivals, education, sports, housing, politics, commerce, travel, etc. Short stories are used to depict cultural aspects such as cultural expressions, proverbs, sayings, and riddles. Literature and cultural materials are incorporated into the course, along with audio-visual and web-based material. In this course, students have an opportunity to participate in language conversation outside the classroom and explore the opportunities for study abroad in East Africa. Swahili Elementary I and II are prerequisite for this course. By the end of this course, students should be able to reach proficiency level Intermediate High according to the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) www.actfl.org.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: SWAHL 1100 and SWAHL 1101.

class: SWED 1210
class title: Elementary Swedish I
description: The goal of this course is to introduce students to the Swedish language as it is spoken in Sweden today. Students have an opportunity to practice listening, speaking, reading and writing in Swedish. Students learn to provide information about their opinions and feelings, their families, their immediate environment and their daily activities.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: SYSEN 1900
class title: Systems Engineering Project for First-Years
description: Project experience for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental project experience outside of regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Intended for first-year students on project teams and for project team members performing non-technical tasks.

class: SYSEN 4900
class title: Systems Engineering Project for Undergraduates
description: Project experience for students who want to pursue a particular analytical, computational, or experimental project experience outside of regular courses, or for informal instruction supplementing that given in regular courses. An engineering report on the project is required of each student. Students are expected to spend 3-4 hours per week per credit hour working on the project. Intended for sophomores, juniors, and seniors on project teams performing technical tasks.

class: SYSEN 5100
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: enrollment in group-based project with strong system design component approved by course instructor.

class: SYSEN 5180
class title: Sociotechnical Systems and Policy
description: This transdisciplinary course provides an in-depth learning experience on the fundamentals of sociotechnical systems, and welcomes students from all academic disciplines. Sociotechnical systems increase system complexity of engineered systems/technology, and this course teaches how to embrace them as part of systems engineering practice. An important dimension of sociotechnical systems is technology policy, and this course brings theory from social science disciplines and systems science together to evaluate how technical products interact with policy systems using systems engineering tools/analysis. Policy development, implementation and analysis in an engineering and technology context and its relationship with life cycle management, risk and quality are important themes in this course. There will be an application component to this class to illustrate the relevance for students from all backgrounds.
outcome: Analyze engineered systems/technical products as embedded sociotechnical systems and their relationship to policy., Apply systems science to social science concepts and apply them in systems engineering tools and methods, including but not limited to: perception and identity; society and culture; and rural and urban spaces., Understand stakeholder engagement and how to practice inclusive, stakeholder-centric systems engineering and technology policy analysis., 

class: SYSEN 5210
class title: Economics of the Energy Transition
description: In response to the risks posed by global climate change, many states and countries have set emissions reductions goals necessitating a rapid transition toward zero-carbon energy resources. Achieving these goals entails unprecedented investment in civil infrastructure systems combined with large-scale consumer and industry adoption of clean energy solutions. This course will explore the economic challenges and opportunities associated with this transition, with an emphasis on the electric power sector. The course is broken into two halves. The first focuses on the economic viability of individual projects. The second develops system level models and considers interactions between competing energy sources.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: CEE 3040 or ENGRD 2700, CEE 3230 or ENMGT 5940.

class: SYSEN 5220
class title: Systems Dynamics
description: This course focuses on the design and development of computational models to understand and predict the dynamic behavior of systems. In particular considerable emphasis will be placed on the development of systems thinking skills in the analysis of systems, the translation of those skills into the creation of computational tools to support modeling of these systems and the testing of those models. Students will build realistic models in commercial software packages including Vensin.

class: SYSEN 5230
class title: Energy Efficiency in the Circular Economy
description: On a net-zero emissions pathway, energy efficiency is a key component. This course discusses different angles to tackle energy efficiency, from energy-efficient technologies to energy and resource-efficient systems. Working with various sectors and case examples, students learn how to address energy efficiency within different systems' boundaries, tracking energy and resources in the circular economy. Students learn how to promote energy efficiency using a system approach and identifying entry points for building a circular economy. The course is designed for students from different backgrounds interested in the multiple dimensions of energy efficiency and implementation of a circular economy, particularly those from engineering.
outcome: Explain and contrast energy efficiency improvement potentials at unit and system levels. (i.e. product level, plant level, infrastructure system level)., Analyze synergies between energy and material flows in the circular economy (as opposed to the linear economy)., Define energy efficiency potentials and constraints using the circular economy framework., Explain system boundaries to explore energy efficiency in different sectors and propose actions for energy efficiency improvements., Critically review energy efficiency options considering multiple criteria including potential energy efficiency improvements at different levels, stakeholder perspectives, and contributions to the circular economy., 

class: SYSEN 5240
class title: Strategies for Climate Action
description: Scientific knowledge on climate change has expanded, policies have been put in place and a global agenda has evolved to engage multiple stakeholders in climate action. Various mechanisms and tools provide a framework for action. Understanding these mechanisms helps stakeholders define strategies, start projects, and become protagonists in climate mitigation and adaptation actions. This course provides analytical and practical knowledge on climate mechanisms and equips students to design climate projects and evaluate implementation pathways in the climate agenda. The focus is on energy-related projects and mitigation measures towards a low-carbon future. The course is designed for students from different backgrounds.
outcome: Explain the roles of national and international stakeholders in the implementation of the global climate change agenda., Explain climate implementation mechanisms (i.e. finance, capacity building, technology transfer, reporting) and their role in addressing climate change and meeting the goals of international agreements (i.e. Paris Agreement)., Analyze and compare climate strategies and climate-related actions and their effect., Design climate-mitigating projects in different sectors and demonstrate how they contribute to climate change mitigation., Calculate the effect of mitigation options (climate policy measures) using transparent and harmonized GHG accounting procedures., Propose strategies and actions for system transformation and explain how they contribute to addressing climate change., 

class: SYSEN 5260
class title: Software Systems Engineering: Design, Develop, and Deliver Software in the Modern Enterprise
description: Students will learn how software is designed, developed, and delivered in the modern enterprise. This class will give project leaders the ability to effectively incorporate Software Engineering into a broader multidisciplinary Systems-Engineering project. Through a mix of principles and hands-on projects students will master the essential concepts and techniques for successful delivery of the software component of a broader Systems Engineering project. We will cover topics in software project management, development tools and environment, techniques for software integration and delivery, software systems architecture, cloud-computing, and designing for security and reliability.
outcome: Design and develop software using modern tools and best practices., Evaluate software architecture and design decisions., Participate in the delivery and deployment of an enterprise software solution., 

class: SYSEN 5290
class title: Transdisciplinarity and Systems
description: Transdisciplinarity involves gaining insights about patterns that occur across or connect disciplines. The course presents multiple perspectives to study the nature, scope, value, and potential of transdisciplinarity as there is no existing universal definition, theory, or methodology. The course examines several kinds of disciplinarity as approaches to problem solving. Problems are investigated in the areas of society, engineering, and nature. Topics include characteristics, management, methodologies, analysis, and tools for understanding and applying approaches. Complex systems are addressed with consideration of interdisciplinary systems, systems-of-systems, varying scales, uncertainty, and nonlinearity.
outcome: Identify disciplinarity of various systems., Develop transdisciplinary methods for defining, describing, and analyzing systems., Demonstrate transdisciplinary approaches to solving systems problems., 

class: SYSEN 5300
class title: Systems Engineering and Six Sigma for the Design and Operation of Reliable Systems
description: Develops skills in the design, operation and control of systems for reliable performance. Focuses on four key themes; risk analysis (with a particular emphasis on risk assessment and risk characterization), modeling system reliability (including the development of statistical models based on accelerated life testing), quality control techniques and the optimization of system design for reliability. Six Sigma Green or Blackbelt can be earned through activities associated with course. Students in distance-learning programs enroll in SYSEN 5100.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ENGRD 2700 or CEE 3040, SYSEN 5100, or permission of instructor.

class: SYSEN 5440
class title: System Analysis and Design
description: This course examines the time-dependent behavior of managed systems to describe, analyze, and understand them. Students will first learn concepts of feedback and system structure and apply these to problem identification. Qualitative and quantitative mental models will be used to define and describe interrelationships that define the system behavior. Principles of how to intervene in a system will also be discussed in this course. Simulation approaches for both discrete and continuous processes will be utilized to set baseline performance metrics and likewise quantify the effects of the identified interventions.
outcome: Recognize historical data sets and differentiate modeling approaches for dynamic and static systems., Define system structure with mental models., Demonstrate the ability to verify and validate simulation models., Design and quantify the effects of policy interventions., 

class: SYSEN 5610
class title: Introduction to the US Healthcare System, Data, and Interoperability
description: In a modern healthcare system, exchange of clinical data across multiple stakeholders - between healthcare organizations, between providers and patients, and among agencies and governmental entities – is pivotal. Health information standards provide the "backbone" to achieve uniform data interoperability and exchange across multiple heterogeneous systems. This course will introduce various existing and emerging clinical data modeling, terminology and knowledge representation standards that are part of Meaningful Use Regulations, and discuss scenarios and use cases where the standards have been applied for routine clinical practice and research. Through lectures, case studies, midterm, and a final project, students will gain insights into topics such as disease classification systems, health information exchanges, and electronic health records (EHR) interoperability.
outcome: Identify and describe the clinical data and interoperability standards., Discuss practical applications and implementation scenarios using health information standards., Analyze and synthesize policies for standards-based health information exchange for research and clinical care., 

class: SYSEN 5620
class title: Health Data Management and Analytics

class: SYSEN 5690
class title: Information Design for Strategic Decision-Making
description: The course covers the basic models and solution approaches in problems that involve interactions among strategic agents distilling the key results in mechanism design theory. Over the last seventy years, the theory of mechanism design was developed as an approach to efficiently align the individuals' and system's interests in problems where individuals have private preferences. It can be viewed as the art of designing information and protocols to achieve a desired outcome. Mechanism design has broad applications spanning many fields, including transportation routing, smart grid, communication networks, social media, online advertising, and resource allocation problems. The objective of this course is to gain a sound understanding of the science behind the use of mechanism design in solving modern problems that involve strategic interactions among agents. The course will provide a unified treatment of the subject, suitable for a broad engineering audience.
outcome: Formulate a mechanism design problem, identify the set of outcomes, and define the social choice function., Identify whether a direct or indirect mechanism is appropriate to use for a given problem., Implement a social choice function using different solution concepts, e.g., dominant strategy implementation, Bayesian Nash implementation, etc., Solve resource allocation problems using mechanism design., 

class: SYSEN 5700
class title: Special Topics in Systems Engineering
description: Supervised study by individuals or small groups of one or more specialized topics not covered in regular courses.

class: SYSEN 5800
class title: Computational Optimization
description: Systems optimization modeling, computation, and applications. Includes theory and algorithms of linear, nonlinear, mixed-integer linear, mixed-integer nonlinear, and deterministic global optimization, as well as stochastic programming, robust optimization and optimization methods for big-data analytics. Real-world applications of large-scale computational optimization in process manufacturing, bioengineering, energy systems, and sustainability.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2220 and MATH 2940.

class: SYSEN 5900
class title: Systems Engineering Design Project
description: A design project that incorporates the principles of systems engineering for a complex system. Projects are performed by teams of students working together to meet the requirements of the project.

class: SYSEN 5930
class title: Project Management and Leadership for Complex Systems
description: This course examines fundamental modern techniques of project management from a systems perspective, including project planning, organization, and control. Topics include leadership, the management process, risk management, scheduling methodologies, management of project activities, and project control mechanisms. Complex systems are addressed at larger scales including combinations of novel, evolving, and legacy systems, implementing adaptive leadership and management strategies and approaches. Complex system leadership, management, risk analysis and mitigation, integrated product and process development, quality management, and contracting are addressed. Complex system leadership and management also includes consideration of communications, interpersonal skills, emotional intelligence, ethics, team dynamics, multiple disciplines, varying scales, uncertainty, and nonlinearity. Covers application of fundamental project leadership and management processes from traditional systems to more complex systems.
outcome: Develop project management plans, processes and approaches and use appropriate tools for traditional and complex systems to control and monitor project management-related tasks., Explain project management organizations tailored to appropriate levels applying different types of approaches., Construct project breakdown structures, programmatic reviews, and milestones that translate system scope and requirements into an organized list of deliverables and tasks as part of a project plan., Demonstrate effective interpersonal behavior and communication with quantitative analysis and reporting as a project team leader., Analyze project uncertainty for cost, schedule and risk by applying mathematical techniques., 

class: SYSEN 5999
class title: MEng Technical Internship
description: Students spend a semester in a Systems Engineering relevant internship. Working with their advisor they draft a paper about their systems engineering experience and the systems engineering educational benefits from that experience. In the semester after the internship, students work with their advisor on the final version of the paper, helping the student to crystalize the value of their experience in developing their systems engineering knowledge and careers.

class: SYSEN 6000
class title: Foundations of Complex Systems
description: This course covers the scientific foundations of the behavior of complex systems. The course is organized in a number of modules motivated by real-life examples of complex systems including aerospace systems, transportation systems, infrastructure systems, or biological systems among others. Each module will introduce, in the context of a specific problem, a number of concepts such as complexity, emergence, collective behavior, self-organization, evolution and adaptation, and pattern formation. Students will learn to use a variety of mathematical tools to analyze these systems, such as non-linear dynamics and controls, game theory, agent-based simulation, network theory, genetic algorithms, neural networks, and cellular automata. Students will be required to do a substantial amount of reading, and there will be roughly biweekly homework and a final project related to one or more of the topics covered.   

class: SYSEN 6100
class title: Systems Seminar Series
description: This is a weekly seminar course designed to give graduate students experience in improving their skills in presenting their research, judging peers' and field experts' research, as well as learning to accurately dissect and summarize the main points of a research talk. Being part of the Systems Engineering program, this course will strongly focus on developing the ability to present research in a broader context or as it relates to a larger system or process, and communicate the importance of the students' work to a more varied audience; a particularly important skill for both future "job talks" and grants' "importance paragraphs." Students' presentations will also include some research depth as part of developing stronger conference talks and to aid classmates in expanding their knowledge.

class: SYSEN 6150
class title: Model Based Systems Engineering
description: Fundamental ideas of systems engineering, and their application to design and development of various types of engineered systems. Defining system requirements, creating effective project teams, mathematical tools for system analysis and control, testing and evaluation, economic considerations, and the system life cycle. Content utilizes model-based systems engineering, which is the integration of systems modeling tools, such as SysML, with tools for systems analysis, such as Matlab and Modelica. The vision for this integration is the ability to create and analyze complete parametric representations of complex products and systems. These systems make it possible to investigate the impact of changing one aspect of a design on all other aspects of design and performance. This course will familiarize students with these modeling languages. Off-campus students must provide their own Windows 7, internet-connected, computer with administrator access in order to install the commercial software used in this course.

class: SYSEN 6180
class title: Sociotechnical Systems and Policy
description: This transdisciplinary course provides an in-depth learning experience on the fundamentals of sociotechnical systems, and welcomes students from all academic disciplines. Sociotechnical systems increase system complexity of engineered systems/technology, and this course teaches how to embrace them as part of systems engineering practice. An important dimension of sociotechnical systems is technology policy, and this course brings theory from social science disciplines and systems science together to evaluate how technical products interact with policy systems using systems engineering tools/analysis. Policy development, implementation and analysis in an engineering and technology context and its relationship with life cycle management, risk and quality are important themes in this course. There will be an application component to this class to illustrate the relevance for students from all backgrounds.
outcome: Analyze engineered systems/technical products as embedded sociotechnical systems and their relationship to policy., Apply systems science to social science concepts and apply them in systems engineering tools and methods, including but not limited to: perception and identity; society and culture; and rural and urban spaces., Understand stakeholder engagement and how to practice inclusive, stakeholder-centric systems engineering and technology policy analysis., 

class: SYSEN 6220
class title: Systems Dynamics
description: This is an advanced course in the application of the systems engineering process to the design and operation of complex systems. Topics include techniques for design, simulation, optimization, and control of complex systems. Case studies and system simulations in diverse areas provide context for the application of these techniques. PhD students will be required to complete additional work.

class: SYSEN 6300
class title: Systems Engineering and Six Sigma for Design and Operation of Reliable Systems
description: Develops skills in the design, operation and control of systems for reliable performance. Focuses on four key themes; risk analysis (with a particular emphasis on risk assessment and risk characterization), modeling system reliability (including the development of statistical models based on accelerated life testing), quality control techniques and the optimization of system design for reliability. Six Sigma Green or Blackbelt can be earned through activities associated with course.

class: SYSEN 6600
class title: Applied Model Based Systems Engineering I
description: This course introduces fundamental ideas of Systems Engineering and their application to the design and development of various types of engineered systems.&amp;nbsp; The systems engineering technical design process is emphasized, following the entire Vee-diagram process from initial problem definition and defining of system requirements, thru systems design &amp; architecture, to implementation planning, and &amp; testing and evaluation. The course also provides an applied introduction to a variety of areas that are commonly a part of Systems Engineering including creating effective project teams, customer needs evaluation, mathematical tools for system analysis, control &amp; optimization, risk analysis and mitigation, decision making strategies, project organization &amp; management, and the system life cycle. The course requires students to combine their work in this course with an outside-of-course MEng project.

class: SYSEN 6800
class title: Computational Optimization
description: Systems optimization modeling, computation, and applications. Includes theory and algorithms of linear, nonlinear, mixed-integer linear, mixed-integer nonlinear, and deterministic global optimization, as well as stochastic programming, robust optimization and optimization methods for big-data analytics. Real-world applications of large-scale computational optimization in process manufacturing, bioengineering, energy systems, and sustainability.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2220, MATH 2940 or equivalents.

class: SYSEN 8000
class title: Systems Doctoral Colloquium
description: Students will be exposed to different research methodologies and engage in critical reviews and discussion of selected research articles in the fields of systems science and engineering. A substantial amount of reading and presentation will be required. 

class: SYSEN 8100
class title: Systems Seminar Series - PhD
description: This is a weekly seminar course designed to give graduate students experience in improving their skills in presenting their research, judging peers' and field experts' research, as well as learning to accurately dissect and summarize the main points of a research talk. Being part of the Systems Engineering program, this course will strongly focus on developing the ability to present research in a broader context or as it relates to a larger system or process, and communicate the importance of the students' work to a more varied audience; a particularly important skill for both future "job talks" and grants' "importance paragraphs." Students' presentations will also include some research depth as part of developing stronger conference talks and to aid classmates in expanding their knowledge.

class: TAG 1100
class title: Elements of Tagalog-Filipino Language and Culture
description: This course will introduce very basic functional uses of Tagalog/Filipino language and elements of Filipino culture to interested students like heritage learners and those who are planning to travel briefly to the Philippines to participate in a short project or study abroad program in the country.

class: TAG 1121
class title: Elementary Tagalog-Filipino I
description: Gives a thorough grounding in basic speaking and listening skills with an introduction to reading and writing.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: TAG 2201
class title: Intermediate Tagalog-Filipino I
description: Develops all four skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TAG 1122 or equivalent.

class: TAG 3301
class title: Advanced Tagalog-Filipino I
description: Continuing instruction on conversational skills but with emphasis on reading and writing. Selected core readings in contemporary Tagalog literature are used, but students, in consultation with the instructor, may select some of the class materials.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TAG 2202 or equivalent.

class: TAMIL 1121
class title: Elementary Tamil I
description: Introduces students to the basic grammatical and syntactical skills required to function adequately in a Tamil-speaking environment. Of particular interest to students planning to conduct scholarly research or fieldwork in that region of the world. Introduces students to the rich culture of the Indian subcontinent where Tamil is spoken.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: TAMIL 4431
class title: Directed Study
description: Intended for advanced language study.

class: TECH 5900
class title: Product Studio
description: The world is transformed by builders -- individuals who combine engineering, business, design, and leadership skills to build new products, services, and business models. The Cornell Tech studio trains you to become a world-class builder. Product studio teaches a systematic process for finding something that is worth building. We learn how to do user and industry research, systematically identify new opportunities, select amongst them, and validate opportunities by designing experiments and prototypes. The class is taught in an experiential "studio" format, i.e. all skills are learned by applying them in building a real world product to address a validated need. Participants assemble teams with the requisite skills and receive extensive feedback on their work from their peers and industry professionals. Some participants go on to further develop these products and launch them as full-time startup founders, or product champions within established companies.

class: TECH 5999
class title: Independent Study

class: TECHIE 5310
class title: Business Fundamentals
description: This course is an introduction to fundamental concepts in business management – strategy, finance and financial accounting, marketing, organizational design, operations management, and negotiations – that are crucial knowledge for any entrepreneur and/or product manager. The course will help you learn the 'language of business,' and prepare you to take business electives in the near term and to run your own firm or product unit in the not-too-distant future, after you graduate from Cornell Tech. Business Fundamentals is not just economics, psychology, sociology, or mathematics, but draws from all of these disciplines. As a result, some of the concepts may sound familiar to some of you, but we will focus on understanding how they are applied to real-world business problems. In order to do so, we will use business cases and exercises in addition to lectures. Analyzing a case study and the resulting deductive learning will help you think in a different way, and will teach you to be comfortable with ambiguity, uncertainty, and contingencies, which are inevitable realities of business life. The general structure of the course is to introduce core concepts in each business area – strategy, finance/accounting, marketing, organizational design, operations management, and negotiations – through a lecture and a reading and then to apply those concepts in analyzing a custom-written case that draws from current business news.

class: TECHIE 5315
class title: Emerging Technologies and Markets
description: Highly current information about new and upcoming technology-powered trends and markets to offer the most up-to-date industry knowledge. These emerging technologies may lead to status quo disruption, and we will explore the latest technological advances affecting traditional business models. Industry pioneers will be guest speakers. Experts will provide an insider's view on the rapidly developing capabilities. The insight will enable students to enter into/continue in the workforce with current marketplace knowledge providing strategic advantage to their organizations, careers, and entrepreneurial efforts. Review of new technologies plus converging to create synergistic growth and ways exploiting these symbiotic effects. Approximately ten new technology areas/industries will be covered in this four-consecutive-night intensive pre-semester seminar course.
outcome: Ability to understand technology-influenced business impacts including what areas to investigate and what questions to ask., Ability to make effective managerial decisions regarding technology-led, technology-dependent, or technology-based business endeavors., Established personal foundation for making difficult, high-integrity, and honorable business management decisions regarding the use of nascent technologies in an organization., Managerial effectiveness and decision-making confidence regarding senior-level, technologically based leadership decisions., 

class: TECHIE 5901
class title: Preparing for Spec
description: This course you will review and apply for available Track 1 project topics that are supervised by Cornell researchers; or select Track 2 for which you will choose an anchor course from a set of approved-electives. This class is required for 1st year students in Connective Media, Health Tech, and Urban Tech; and is a prerequisite for INFO 5920.

class: THAI 1121
class title: Elementary Thai I
description: This beginning level course provides a solid grounding in all four language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) with an emphasis on speaking and listening comprehension.  The aim is to enable learners to think in Thai and learn to converse and "get around" in certain basic situations in daily life.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: THAI 2201
class title: Intermediate Thai I
description: Continues to develop and comprehensively extends the four language skills acquired at the Elementary level (listening, speaking, reading, and writing).
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: placement by instructor.

class: THAI 3301
class title: Advanced Thai I
description: Develops advanced speaking skill with emphasis on selected readings in Thai from various fields, for example, History, Anthropology, Government, Economics, Agriculture, as well as other professional schools.  The readings are supplemented with visual materials such as video clips and films.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: placement by instructor.

class: THAI 3303
class title: Thai Literature I
description: Reading of significant novels, short stories, and poetry written since 1850 and other classical works.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: placement by instructor.

class: THAI 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Thai
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: TIBET 1111
class title: Elementary Modern Tibetan I
description: This is an introductory course and no previous knowledge is required. It focuses on developing basic abilities to speak as well as to read and write in modern Tibetan, Lhasa dialect. Students are also introduced to modern Tibetan studies through selected readings and guest lectures.

class: TIBET 1121
class title: Elementary Classical Tibetan I
description: Introduces students to the grammar of Classical Literary Tibetan as found in Indian treatises translated from Sanskrit into Tibetan, as well as indigenous Tibetan philosophical works. The course progresses through a sequence of the basic rudiments of the language, including an introduction to the script and its romanization, pronunciation (central Lhasan dialect), normative dictionary order, and the basic categories of grammar. Following these preliminaries, students proceed to guided readings in Tibetan literature designed to introduce them to the formal approach of Tibetan lexical semantics with an emphasis on the role of verbs in determining argument realization options. Over the duration of the course, students encounter new vocabulary (and associated Buddhist concept hierarchies) and increasingly complex sentence structures. This course thus provides a solid foundation for the later exploration of other genres of literature and styles of composition.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: TIBET 2201
class title: Intermediate Classical Tibetan I
description: This two-semester class is designed to assist students who already have the equivalent of at least one year of Tibetan language study. The course is intended to build on this foundation so that students gain greater proficiency in reading a variety of classical Tibetan writing styles and genres, including (especially in the second semester) texts relevant to their research.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: equivalency of two semesters of Tibetan language study (modern or classical).

class: TIBET 2211
class title: Intermediate Modern Tibetan I
description: For those whose knowledge is equivalent to a student who has completed the first-year course. The course focuses on the further development of their skills in using the language to engage with practical topics and situations, such as seeing a doctor, reading news, writing letters, and listening to music.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TIBET 1112 or equivalent.

class: TIBET 3301
class title: Advanced Classical Tibetan I
description: This class is designed to assist students who already have the equivalent of at least two years of Classical Tibetan language study. The course is intended to build on this foundation so that students gain greater proficiency in reading a variety of classical Tibetan writing styles and genres, including texts relevant to their research.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TIBET 2202  or equivalent.

class: TIBET 3311
class title: Advanced Modern Tibetan I
description: For those whose knowledge is equivalent to a student who has completed the second-year course. The course develops students' reading comprehension skills through reading selected modern Tibetan literature. Tibetan is used as the medium of instruction and interaction to develop oral fluency and proficiency.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: TIBET 2212 or equivalent.

class: TOX 7010
class title: Mouse and Stem Cell Pathology
description: Introduction to principles and methods of pathology. Pathology role in stem cell research, regenerative medicine and cancer biology. Systematic evaluation of mouse models, with a particular attention to such topics as experimental design, model validation, identification of novel phenotypes, histotechnology and mouse necropsy.
outcome: Understand principles and methods of pathology as discipline., Experience in planning of animal experiments, collecting and processing of biological materials., Become familiar with pathology terminology., Learn about the role of stem cell pathology in stem cell research and regenerative medicine., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic histology course BIOAP 4130 is highly recommended.

class: TURK 1330
class title: Elementary Turkish through TV Series I
description: In this introductory course of a sequence of two, learners will develop a basic foundation in reading, writing, listening, and beginning conversation skills in contemporary Turkish. Learners will read short texts on Turkish culture, handle non-complex social conversations, understand sentence-level statements, and write simple paragraphs on familiar topics. This course has a section focused on Turkish TV series. In this section, the learners will have a deeper understanding of Turkish language, society, and culture. They will watch the most popular TV series, complete the assigned tasks, and discuss in class. This course is for new learners of Turkish.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: TURK 1332
class title: Intermediate Turkish I
description: In this course, learners will advance their reading, writing, listening and conversation skills in contemporary Turkish as they move towards extended conversation, written communication, academic listening/watching, and research. This course has sections focused on Turkish Literature, TV series, and cinema. In this section, the learners will have a deeper understanding of Turkish language, society, and culture. The course also has sections designed for heritage speaker needs.  
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year (two semesters) elementary Turkish or permission of instructor.

class: TURK 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Turkish
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: UKRAN 1100
class title: Introduction to the Geography, History, Culture, and Language of Ukraine
description: The course offers a general overview of the geography, history, literature, cinema, fine arts, music, and language of this Eastern European country of some 40 million people. At various historical periods since the 18th century, Ukraine had been controlled by the Russian Empire and Soviet Union, gained independence in 1991, and become the target of a military invasion by Russian Federation in 2022. Through assigned readings, videos, and other materials, students will gain a degree of understanding of the historical and social forces that shape Ukrainian everyday life, natural environments, and popular culture, and its current place in Europe and the world.

class: UKRAN 2133
class title: Intermediate Ukrainian I
description: The course starts with a review and subsequent reinforcement of grammar fundamentals and core vocabulary pertaining to the most common aspects of daily life. Principal emphasis is placed on further development of students' communicative skills (oral and written) on such topics as the self, family, studies and leisure, travel, meals and others.

class: UKRAN 2200
class title: Ukraine's Culture and Language within the Legacy of the USSR, Russian Invasion, and Other Crises
description: This course offers a close look at the language and culture in independent Ukraine: Western vs. Slavic linguistic heritage, Internet styles, Russian vis-a-vis Ukrainian influence, and more. Mileposts of the 20th and the 21st centuries are discussed in depth. This is not a course in history or government; the recent complex (often cataclysmic) events in Ukraine are investigated in the context of the everyday life of our contemporaries. How have Ukrainians pursued self-determination through culture and language after decades of oppression and control? The course is taught by a recent refugee from the Ukrainian war who is especially interested in Ukraine's new role on the world stage. Why the yellow-and-blue flags and bumper stickers in our streets and parking lots?

class: UKRAN 3133
class title: Advanced Ukrainian I
description: This content-based modular course aims to develop students' capacity to use the Ukrainian language as a research and communication tool in a variety of specialized functional and stylistic areas that include literary fiction, scholarly prose, printed and broadcast journalism. It is designed for students with interest in the history, politics, literature, culture and other aspects of contemporary Ukraine, as well as those who plan to do their research, business or reporting about Ukraine.

class: UKRAN 3300
class title: Directed Studies
description: Taught on a specialized basis for students with special projects (e.g., to supplement a non-language course or thesis work).

class: UKRAN 3305
class title: Reading and Writing for Heritage Speakers of Ukrainian
description: Intended for students who speak more or less standard Ukrainian but have only beginner's understanding of Ukrainian grammar and have not learned to read or write in Ukrainian well (or have not learned written Ukrainian at all). May be taught slightly faster or slower in a given year, depending on the needs and interests of the students. Two classes a week teach writing and grammar and related reading. These classes are required, and the students who take them receive 2 credit hours. The third (optional) class teaches reading and discussion, focusing on contemporary styles.

class: UNILWYL 1120
class title: Wonder Women
description: This course brings together students, faculty, and invited guests to discuss the art of leadership and the opportunities and challenges women in leadership roles have encountered in their careers and how they have managed them. The sessions will be held in North Campus faculty residences and will feature prominent women from different professions and walks of life. Potential speakers include politicians; artists; writers; scientists; women in spiritual life; and business owners and entrepreneurs. Speakers will share their stories with students in an informal way, opening up faculty-facilitated discussions about gender, leadership, accomplishment, work-life balance, and mentorship. These talks may be interspersed with or supplemented by reading and discussion of recent writing on women and leadership.            
outcome: Interact with faculty and invited guests on a weekly basis in the North Campus residence halls., Analyze challenges and opportunities for women in leadership by learning about the varied lives and careers of women leaders., Gain insight into potential career paths and different ways women have constructed successful careers., Engage in informal discussions with faculty and invited guests about gender, career enhancement strategies, and work-life balance., 

class: UNILWYL 1140
class title: Everyday Economics
description: In this course, students will explore the surprising ways economics can shed light on the contemporary challenges we, as humans, face. There is no math in this course and no prior economics experience is needed – just come with curiosity and an open mind! TED talks/videos and the framework of economics will be used to discuss questions ranging from how our minds work, to how we interact with others and the world around us.  

class: UNILWYL 1150
class title: Nature and Your Wellbeing
description: Get ready for an adventure and prepare to embark on a journey through Cornell's beautiful campus in this one-of-a-kind course! From hidden gardens to majestic gorges, students will explore nature's wonders every week, building their toolkit of resources and knowledge about nature and well-being, exploring cultural perspectives on nature, and dismantling barriers to time in nature. With studies showing that nature boosts focus and reduces stress, expect this class to be an educational breath of fresh air. Whether a seasoned outdoor enthusiast or a nature newbie, be ready to foster your connection with nature!

class: UNILWYL 1190
class title: Election 2024: Finding Your Voice
description: The US Presidential Election is a complex process with sweeping social, cultural, and economic implications. This course is designed to demystify the election process, to inform about key policy implications, and to empower students to understand the process and make informed decisions. This course combines small group discussion with North Campus-wide events, and it will help students build skills in public speaking and communicating about difficult topics.

class: UNILWYL 1402
class title: Rose Scholars Program
description: Rose Scholars program is an interdisciplinary course available only to residents of Flora Rose House. The program requires weekly participation in one of about five guided trips, workshops, discussions, lectures, and performances in social sciences, natural sciences, arts, humanities, and other fields. Participants reflect on their experiences with weekly digital media postings. The program is designed to introduce participants to the breadth of intellectual resources and activities on the Cornell campus and in the nearby community.

class: UNILWYL 1404
class title: Cook Conversations and Community Engagement: Bridging Self and World
description: This interdisciplinary course serves as a gateway for engagement in the Alice Cook House living and learning community, which is part of the West Campus House System. This guest speaker series is an informal way to interact with Cornell faculty and administrative leaders, and dialogue with visitors to who leads a conversation on a topic or passion that is dear to them. From discussions with faculty about their research and career paths to understanding the inner workings of Cornell Dining, there is something for everyone in this course. Each week features a different guest speaker and these intimate and informal conversations are designed to cover a breadth of topics that allow students to explore fields in which they have no specific background knowledge. As such, the topics are as varied and stimulating as the extraordinary lives and minds of those who come to chat with students about the things they care most about. Spaces (both physical and digital) will be provided for students to engage in informal discussions with Cornell faculty members, other invited speakers, and each other. The goal is to provide a platform for critical thinking and reflection within and beyond the boundaries of one's own discipline(s). Join House Professor-Dean Chantal Thomas in informal conversations on a range of interesting issues that shape our lives.

class: UNILWYL 1405
class title: Bridging Disciplines: Active Citizens at Cook House
description: Bridging Disciplines is a course requirement for the Active Citizens program at Alice Cook House. One pillar of active citizenship is learning about different academic disciplines and gaining a sense of the questions being asked and the research being done currently on the Cornell campus. This weekly informal discussion series brings together speakers from across departments to talk with undergraduate students about their research at Cornell. Cook House residents who are not in the Active Citizens program may attend the class on a drop-in basis.

class: UNILWYL 1406
class title: Bethe Ansatz: What Makes a Fulfilled Life
description: On a weekly basis, Bethe Ansatz brings together students, Cornell faculty, and other distinguished guests for informal, substantive engagement around a wide range of issues and endeavors: intellectual, cultural, artistic, scientific, moral, social, and political. Weekly seminar meetings, chaired by the instructor, will feature a guest who is typically a member of the Cornell faculty, a visiting professor, or other visiting scientist, scholar, artist, or public figure. The conversational format, which encourages discussion and interaction, allows students to discover for themselves the intrinsic interest and reward of a life characterized by broad, vital intellectual curiosity and engagement.

class: UNILWYL 1408
class title: Carl Becker Café
description: The café series is a weekly informal discussion held every Wednesday evening. The café features guest speakers who share their experience and expertise and often speak to challenging issues of our time. Our guests are eloquent, committed people leading very interesting lives. Hosted in the Becker House Professor's apartment, at café you'll enjoy great conversation in a relaxed environment with coffee and treats provided! You may join the café on a drop-in basis or take it as a 1-credit S/U course.

class: UNILWYL 1409
class title: Stress Less, Do More: Embrace the Science of Happiness for a Calmer Student Life
description: This is an experiential learning course in which students are introduced to evidence-based strategies to enhance their well-being. By engaging students in hands-on experiences and reflection, students increase self-awareness and gain insight into specific practices that support their well-being. A focus of the course will be the intersection of productivity (e.g., effective study habits) and psychological well-being. Material will be drawn heavily from the field of positive psychology.

class: UNILWYL 1414
class title: Charting Your Career Pathway

class: UNILWYL 1420
class title: Sexual Citizenship
description: Using a public health approach, "Sexual Citizenship" draws on the Sexual Health Initiative to Foster Transformation (SHIFT) study from Columbia University and the work of Jennifer Hirsh and Seamus Kahn, as well as the Sexual Assault and Related Misconduct (SARM) survey data from Cornell University, to explore the social ecosystem that makes sexual assault on college campuses a common experience. Using a framework that introduces the concepts of "sexual projects," "sexual citizenship," and "sexual geographies," we will explore the role of physical spaces, peers, and social and cultural influences that shape students' experiences and interpretations of both sex and sexual assault. A focus for the course will be individuals' agency, culture change and 'bright spots' (what is working, what is positive).

class: UNILWYL 1515
class title: Dialogue Across Political Differences
description: This course will be a space for genuine conversation about and across political differences. Throughout the course, students will connect with themselves and others about who they are, what they believe, and how they act as agents within political systems. They will: reflect on how our political identities are shaped and how they connect with social identities; examine political beliefs and opinions around current policy conflicts; and explore different forms of political engagement. Throughout the course participants will gain skills for communicating effectively across differences, reflect on the impact of engaging with others whose political perspectives are different from their own, and work collaboratively to foster a "brave space" where curiosity and a willingness to understand are promoted.

class: UNILWYL 1520
class title: Using the Power of Food to Confront Climate Change
description: This course will help students use the power of food to help make climate change relevant to others. We all eat, it's all changing and research shows that people want to know more about climate change impacts on their food. The course includes an overview of climate change science, the food system, the many ways our food is changing, how to communicate about climate change and change behaviors, a climate change dining experience, and what needs to be done to keep our favorite foods on the menu. And coincidentally, help keep our planet livable.

class: UNILWYL 1540
class title: Introduction to Research Methods
description: This class introduces students to methods used in assessment research. Course participants will learn qualitative and quantitative approaches to collecting and analyzing data. The residential community of Alice Cook House is foregrounded as the focus of this living-laboratory course. Guest lecturers from various departments will share their research methods.

class: UNILWYL 1542
class title: Introduction to Technology Transfer
description: This course provides students with an introduction to technology transfer. It offers an overview to the many resources on campus pertaining to the transfer of technology. Guest lecturers from across campus will discuss the work that has been done on campus and how it has transitioned from the lab to use in wider applications. Interwoven into the course is an exploration of historical and contemporary discussions, both in the US and abroad, that relate to technology transfer.

class: URDU 2225
class title: Intermediate Urdu Reading and Writing I
description: This course is designed to develop competence in Urdu reading and writing for students with a first-year knowledge of Hindi and knowledge of Urdu script. The goal of this course is to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing abilities in Urdu. By the end of the course, students will have the ability to read articles, write short stories and translate Urdu writings. May be taken concurrently with Intermediate Hindi.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: URDU 1125 or permission of instructor.

class: URDU 3325
class title: Literary Reading and Writing in Advanced Urdu
description: Designed for those students who have either taken Intermediate Urdu or are at the same level of competency in reading and writing skills. The goals of this class are to improve Urdu literary reading and writing abilities, primarily through reading various forms of Urdu prose. In addition, students learn about various genres of Urdu poetry and watch video clips and lectures that enhance listening and speaking abilities as well as the understanding and appreciation of Urdu culture.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: intermediate Urdu or same level of written and oral proficiency.

class: URDU 5509
class title: Graduate Studies in Urdu
description: Topics vary by semester in relation to student needs.

class: VETCS 7100
class title: Advanced Veterinary Anesthesiology I
description: This course is designed to prepare house officers in the Section of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine for the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA) certifying examination. It also provides continuing education for faculty and staff. The course is suitable for interns and residents training in other specialties, such as surgery, internal medicine, emergency medicine, critical care, and laboratory animal medicine, as well as graduate students with interests in applied physiology and pharmacology. It consists of a three-year cycle of topics (two semesters of anatomy and physiology - focusing on the respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurological systems - and one semester each of pharmacology, equipment, monitoring, and clinical anesthesiology). Each week, a lecture (usually presented by a resident or faculty member in the Section of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, or sometimes by faculty from other sections and departments), resident-led book chapter review, or laboratory is held. An online, multiple-choice, mock ACVAA examination concludes each semester.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5606 or permission of instructor.

class: VETMI 7030
class title: Biomedical Sciences: Foundations of the PhD
description: This course is designed to support the comprehensive success of PhD students in the Biological and Biomedical Sciences. Preference given to those in the Initiative for Maximizing Student Development (IMSD) program. Enrollment in this course is by instructor permission only.

class: VETMI 7120
class title: Seminars in Infection and Immunity
description: The Seminars in Infection and Immunity Series hosts local, national, and international speakers in the immunology, microbiology, virology, and parasitology sectors to acquaint students with current advances and insight in the field. This course provides students with lunch discussions with each speaker to offer networking opportunities with established scientists. Seminars are open to the public. The seminar schedule and list of speakers for each semester can be found by going to the CVM Department of Microbiology and Immunology website.

class: VETMI 7401
class title: Apicomplexa
description: In-depth look at Apicomplexa of major importance in domestic animals. Emphasis on parasites common in North America and Europe. Presents details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, disease, and preventative and curative treatment. As relevant, susceptibility and resistance to available parasiticides highlighted. Information from primary literature will be reviewed.

class: VETMI 7402
class title: Excavata
description: In-depth look at excavates of major importance in domestic animals. Emphasis on parasites common in North America and Europe. Details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, disease, and preventative and curative treatment. As relevant, susceptibility and resistance to available parasiticides will be highlighted. Information from primary literature will be reviewed.

class: VETMI 7403
class title: Mites
description: In-depth look at mites of major importance in domestic animals. Emphasis on parasites common in North America and Europe. Details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, disease, and preventative and curative treatment. Consideration of susceptibility and resistance to available parasiticides. Information from primary literature will be reviewed where applicable.

class: VETMI 7404
class title: Ticks
description: In-depth look at soft and hard ticks of major importance in domestic animals. Emphasis on species common in North America and Europe. Details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, disease, and preventative and curative treatment. Pivotal role of ticks as vectors highlighted. Efficacy of available parasiticides will be considered.

class: VETMI 7405
class title: Fleas and Lice
description: In-depth look at fleas and lice of major importance in domestic animals common in North America and Europe. Details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, pathology, host immunity, clinical presentation, and preventative and curative treatment. Their role as mechanical and biological vectors of disease will be discussed. Efficacy of available parasiticides discussed. 

class: VETMI 7407
class title: Internal Parasites of Cats
description: In-depth look at feline endoparasites of major importance in North America and Europe. Details of taxonomy, biology, epidemiology, pathology, host immunity, clinical presentation, and preventative and curative treatment. Consideration of efficacy of available parasiticides. Information from studies reported in primary literature will be reviewed where applicable.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VETMI 7440 or permission of instructor required.

class: VETMI 7416
class title: Introductory Pharmacology
description: This course will familiarize students with the fundamental principles, history, and scope of pharmacology and, provide a basic understanding of major definitions and terms used in pharmacology.

class: VETMI 7418
class title: Parasitologic Diagnostic Methods Video Lab
description: This course will present the principles behind commonly used diagnostic techniques to identify parasitic infections, including:  fecal and blood examination techniques, culture methods, morphologic identification, ELISA, PCR, patient-side tests, and more.  Lectures will be comprised mainly of video demonstrations of the relevant techniques.

class: VETMI 7420
class title: Parasite Identification Laboratory
description: Identification and differentiation of common protistan, helminth and acarid parasites and artifacts and pseudoparasites found in the feces, urine, blood, and skin scrapings of domestic animals.

class: VETMI 7422
class title: Non-Morphologic Parasite Identification Laboratory
description: Parasitologic diagnostics  with non morphologic modalities.  This course will focus on immunologic and molecular means of parasite identification.

class: VETMI 7430
class title: Drug Discovery-The Big 12
description: In-depth look at the history of twelve major pharmacologic agents that have changed the world and some of which are still a critical part of today's pharmacopoeia. The histories are telling and engaging and are important for the understanding of the impact of drugs on the animals and people.  

class: VETMI 7431
class title: Antiparasitic Vaccines
description: Discussions on the principles of vaccine design, the history of vaccine use in veterinary medicine, and the regulatory approval process with focus on specific products developed for coccidia in poultry, vector-borne protozoal agents, and nematodes of livestock; the successes and failures of these efforts; and future prospects.

class: VETMI 7435
class title: Federal Government's Role in Animal Health
description: Many federal agencies interact with the veterinary community in activities such as disease reporting, the regulatory process of drug approval, and pharmaceutical adverse event reporting. Congress also plays a very important role in animal health. This course will provide a broad review of the structure and roles of the government with respect to animal health, relating how they are relevant to the animal health community. Lectures will emphasize government structure and codification of authority; understanding federal authorities and activities in areas including agriculture, disease reporting, pharmaceutical regulation, research, and trade; and case studies. Guest presentations from experts who have worked with or for many of these agencies will be provided. This course is intended for students enrolled in their first semester of the Master of Professional Studies in Veterinary Medicine. 

class: VETMI 7436
class title: Capstone Project I
description: In this course students will develop a topic for their literature-review dealing directly with a subject in veterinary parasitology and will be assigned a faculty mentor.  Students will identify their academic sources and will be expected to submit an annotated bibliography for review. This course will assess a student's ability to read, evaluate and integrate the research literature into the design of a veterinary parasitology investigation. 

class: VETMI 7440
class title: Parasites of Domestic Animals
description: Introduction to the arthropod, protist, and helminth parasites of domestic animals with an emphasis on the biology, diseases induced, and their control. Objective is to have a basic understanding of the biology of these organisms that are important to veterinary medicine, producers, consumers, and commercial antiparasite product and vaccine developers.

class: VETMI 7446
class title: Capstone Project II
description: Critical evaluation and integration of the research literature is a critical tool of the modern parasitologist. This course will provide students with the ability to read, understand, evaluate and integrate the research literature in veterinary parasitology. Students will enhance their writing and presentation skills in the preparation of the project. Students will prepare a literature-review based project dealing directly with a subject in veterinary parasitology.  This project is an in depth and extensive review of the literature, culminating in the preparation of an hour-long lecture to be presented at the end of the course, and submit a final copy of the required paper. This course is intended for students enrolled in their final semester of the Masters of Professional Studies in Veterinary Medical Sciences. Students will present to MPS faculty in person during the final exam period.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VETMI 7436.

class: VETMI 7449
class title: Scientific Writing and Critical Review of Literature
description: Through critically reviewing peer reviewed parasitology literature, course participants will gain skills in assessing study design and interpretation of results. Written critiques and annotations of literature will enable opportunities to practice scientific writing. In addition, participants will gain skills in oral and poster presentations and grant writing.

class: VIEN 1104
class title: Introduction to Wines and Vines
description: Broad introduction to grape cultivation and wine fermentations. Topics include history of winemaking, viticultural regions, vineyard and winery practices, wine flavor chemistry and microbiology, and wine flavor perception. Tasting wines in class illustrates the components that determine wine quality.
outcome: Describe the importance of fermentations to human history, health and cultures., Apply basic chemistry and biology to viticulture and enology., Explain general grape cultivation and wine production procedures., Demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., 

class: VIEN 2204
class title: Principles and Practices of Growing Grapes and Making Wines
description: Viticulture and enology principles and practices, emphasizing cool climate production. Course examines environmental factors affecting grape production and quality, soils, and anatomical and physiological bases for vineyard management decision-making. All aspects of winemaking are covered, from harvest decisions to bottling, with concentration on practices through fermentation completion. Students research viticultural &amp; enological options, and make all decisions for a particular wine region and style. Course requires significant work outside of class sessions, with most topics presented as flipped sessions (lectures outside of class and learning activities during class sessions).&amp;nbsp;This course is suitable for non-life sciences majors.
outcome: Illustrate the phenology and growth of grapevines., Demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., Describe different grapevine rootstocks, their attributes, and backgrounds., Discuss the climatic requirements of grapevines., Explain and assess fruit growth, development, and ripening., Define and evaluate the impact of viticultural practices and environmental influences on vine growth and fruit composition., List and recognize grape pests and diseases., Apply basic chemistry and biology principles to enology techniques & analyses., Explain each step in winemaking procedure, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Discuss information in books and articles, using good critical evaluation skills., 
distribution categories: (BIO-AG, OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 1104, college-level general chemistry and general biology (at least one of each).

class: VIEN 2205
class title: Growing Grapes and Making Wines Laboratory
description: Field trips, vineyard and winery work provide opportunities for application of knowledge gained in Grapes to Wines lecture course. Students will produce a wine, from grape harvest determination to cold stabilization. Some winery activities between laboratory sessions plus a two-day field trip expected.
outcome: Demonstrate wine analytical techniques., Identify different grapevine species and cultivars in the vineyard., Assess fruit ripening and make good decisions about harvest time., Explain each step in winemaking process, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Produce wines from grape harvest to cold stabilized products., Demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 1105. Prerequisite or Corequisite: VIEN 2204.

class: VIEN 2310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer
description: This course uses beer and brewing science as a starting point to explore topics in fermentation biology, food chemistry, food processing, and sensory perception. Students will learn to recognize the major sensory and chemical features that distinguish different beer styles or defects, and understand how raw materials and choices during production lead to these outcomes. Several guest lectures, including brewers and producers of raw materials, will also be included.
outcome: Differentiate between the basic physiological senses of human perception of foods and beverages. Describe how these senses are utilized to perceive the qualities of foods and beverages., Describe some of the fundamental principles of odor and taste perception., Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations, Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Describe the sensory properties of major beer styles and explain how they differ in production practices and chemical composition., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Summarize the positive health impacts of moderate beer consumption and contrast these benefits with the negative health impacts of alcohol misuse/abuse. Also differentiate between the current treatment options for alcohol use disorders., Summarize ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology and chemistry, or permission of instructor.

class: VIEN 3610
class title: Vineyard Management I
description: This course is designed to develop the relevant skills required for pre-harvest, harvest, and post-harvest management in a winegrape vineyard. Focused on hands-on, active learning, students will spend significant time in the Cornell University vineyards.
outcome: Examine the implementation and outcomes of different harvest strategies., Describe the complex process of determining harvest timing., Apply basic chemistry and biology principles to viticultural & enological techniques used around harvest., Record and use harvest statistics., Examine the effects and control strategies of key pests and diseases., Assess the status of a vineyard going into dormancy., Understand basic tractor operation and maintenance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 1104, VIEN 2204 (or concurrent enrollment), one semester of introductory biology, and one semester of introductory chemistry.

class: VIEN 4310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer Laboratory
description: An introduction to the practical application of brewing. Students will make several different styles of beer in a laboratory setting to understand how raw materials and processing technologies influence the production of recognizable beer styles. Emphasis will be placed on sanitation, raw material selection, yeast selection, and the manipulation of process variables to control product outcomes. Students will also learn the alternatives in current practice for finishing, carbonation, and packaging.
outcome: Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Describe and differentiate beer processing, fermentation, and aging parameters used in different styles of traditional beer production., Explain the role of the raw materials (grains, fruits, and other agricultural products, barrels, etc.) and the choices that distillers have in their use and source., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Describe ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204 and VIEN 2205/FDSC 2205.

class: VIEN 4400
class title: Wine and Grape Flavor Chemistry
description: Uses a (bio)-chemical perspective to investigate viticulture and enological factors that impact flavor and other quality attributes (mouthfeel, color, stability) of wine and wine grapes.
outcome: Identify and describe (orally and in writing) the key compounds that influence wine organoleptic properties., Identify and describe how viticultural and enological practices affect those key compounds., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one semester of general chemistry and one semester of organic chemistry. Recommended prerequisite: prior course work in or knowledge of viticulture and enology.

class: VIEN 4460
class title: Advanced Viticulture Topics
description: This course is designed to delve in-depth into the scientific literature that should drive decision making in vineyard production systems. We will critically evaluate studies from around the world and discuss their applicability to winegrape production systems in a range of climates.
outcome: Students will be able to describe the major environmental, agricultural, and economic challenges facing wine-grape production today., Students will be able to describe to what level science has informed common wine-grape production practices., Students will be able to examine how the academic literature can be applied to wine-grape production., Students will be able to assess the potential contribution of specific scientific studies to the wine-grape industry., Students will be able to identify specific challenges in wine-grape production that need to be addressed by scientific experimentation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204.

class: VIEN 4500
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I
description: Provides an in-depth study of the chemical, physical, technological, microbiological and regulatory fundamentals of winemaking. Concentration is on grape and must handling, juice adjustments and treatments, diverse production methods and wine styles, and regulatory compliance. Equipment used in grape processing and wine production is studied. Course builds on previous winemaking course material regarding grape processing and alcoholic and malolactic fermentation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204, VIEN 2205, VIEN 2400, and BIOMI 2900, or permission of instructor.

class: VIEN 4510
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I Laboratory
description: Students will produce, monitor, and evaluate diverse wine styles from several grape varieties using different vinification techniques. The laboratory includes introductory lectures, grape handling and vinification using various equipment and production methods, and emphasizes good production practices including sanitation. Students must develop their own winemaking plan for several different grape varieties, and participate in self-guided wine production activities, thus previous experience in wine production is highly recommended.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: FDSC 4500/VIEN 4500.

class: VIEN 4650
class title: Wine Microbiology
description: Microbes are all around us affecting almost every aspect of our lives. This course focuses on the roles that microbes play in the production and spoilage of wine. Wine microbiology is a 3 credit course (2 lecture credits, 1 laboratory credit).
outcome: Identify the different microbes present during wine production, and describe the positive or negative biological roles that they play during wine production, including stuck/sluggish/spoiled fermentations., Summarize practically relevant aspects of wine microbiology and evaluate microbial issues in wine production., Explain routine microbiological techniques useful in a winery., Develop independent research projects related to the roles of microbes in the winery, including designing and executing experiments to rigorously test hypotheses and/or explore wine microbiology-related topics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: general microbiology lecture and laboratory, organic chemistry, biochemistry.

class: VIEN 4960
class title: Viticulture and Enology Internship
description: Internships provide experiential learning opportunities in real-life winery and vineyard circumstances where classroom knowledge is applied and evaluated. Students are able to master new skills, compare pilot-scale with commercial-scale winemaking practices, solve problems, interact in workplace situations, and build networks for future career opportunities. While working with industry mentors, students apply classroom knowledge, critical thinking, and self-directed learning skills to work effectively. Learning contract and documentation required for credit. May be taken twice.

class: VIEN 4970
class title: Individual Study in Viticulture and Enology
description: Undergraduate individual study in viticulture and enology under the direction of one or more faculty members. Since topics vary, the course may be repeated for credit.

class: VIEN 4980
class title: Undergraduate Teaching Experience
description: Students assist in teaching a course appropriate to their previous training and experience. TA duties are determined by student and instructor(s) of course. Since topics vary, the course may be repeated for credit.

class: VIEN 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Viticulture and Enology
description: Undergraduate individual study or research in viticulture and enology under the direction of one or more faculty members. Since topics vary, the course may be repeated for credit.

class: VIEN 5204
class title: Principles and Practices of Growing Grapes and Making Wines
description: Viticulture and enology principles and practices, emphasizing cool climate production. Course examines environmental factors affecting grape production and quality, soils, and anatomical and physiological bases for vineyard management decision-making. All aspects of winemaking are covered, from harvest decisions to bottling, with concentration on practices through fermentation completion. Students research viticultural &amp; enological options, and make all decisions for a particular wine region and style. Course requires significant work outside of class sessions, with most topics presented as flipped sessions (lectures outside of class and learning activities during class sessions).
outcome: Illustrate the phenology and growth of grapevines., Demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., Describe different grapevine rootstocks, their attributes, and backgrounds., Discuss the climatic requirements of grapevines., Explain chemical changes during fruit development & ripening and how they relate to harvest decisions based on wine style., Define and evaluate the impact of viticultural practices and environmental influences on vine growth and fruit composition., List and recognize grape pests and diseases., Apply basic chemistry and biology principles to winemaking techniques & analyses., Explain winemaking practices, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Access & discuss information in books and articles, using good critical evaluation skills., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: college level biology course, college level chemistry course and VIEN 1104.

class: VIEN 5205
class title: Growing Grapes and Making Wines Graduate Laboratory
description: Field trips, vineyard and winery work provide opportunities for application of knowledge gained in Grapes to Wines lecture course. Students will produce a wine, from grape harvest determination to cold stabilization. Some winery activities between laboratory sessions plus a two-day field trip expected.
outcome: Demonstrate wine analytical techniques., Identify different grapevine species and cultivers in the vineyard., Assess fruit ripening and make good decisions about harvest time., Explain each step in winemaking process, including typical procedures used and the scientific rationale for choosing a particular technique from alternatives at each step., Produce wines from grape harvest to cold stabilized products 6- demonstrate wine flavor evaluation and appreciation techniques., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: VIEN 5204.

class: VIEN 5310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer
description: This course uses beer and brewing science as a starting point to explore topics in fermentation biology, food chemistry, food processing, and sensory perception. Students will learn to recognize the major sensory and chemical features that distinguish different beer styles or defects, and understand how raw materials and choices during production lead to these outcomes. Several guest lectures, including brewers and producers of raw materials, will also be included.
outcome: Differentiate between the basic physiological senses of human perception of foods and beverages. Describe how these senses are utilized to perceive the qualities of foods and beverages., Describe some of the fundamental principles of odor and taste perception., Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Describe the sensory properties of major beer styles and explain how they differ in production practices and chemical composition., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Summarize the positive health impacts of moderate beer consumption and contrast these benefits with the negative health impacts of alcohol misuse/abuse. Also differentiate between the current treatment options for alcohol use disorders., Summarize ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: introductory biology and chemistry, or permission of instructor.

class: VIEN 5500
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I
description: Provides an in-depth study of the chemical, physical, technological, microbiological and regulatory fundamentals of winemaking. Concentration is on grape and must handling, juice adjustments and treatments, diverse production methods and wine styles, and regulatory compliance. Equipment used in grape processing and wine production is studied. Course builds on previous winemaking course material regarding grape processing and alcoholic and malolactic fermentation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204, VIEN 2205, VIEN 2400, and BIOMI 2900, or permission of instructor.

class: VIEN 5510
class title: Advanced Winemaking Theory and Practice I Laboratory
description: Students will produce, monitor, and evaluate diverse wine styles from several grape varieties using different vinification techniques. The laboratory includes introductory lectures, grape handling and vinification using various equipment and production methods, and emphasizes good production practices including sanitation.
outcome: Describe and differentiate traditional red, white, sparkling, and dessert winemaking methods and styles and understand the regulations which control them., Describe and distinguish the technological and equipment options for wine and grape processing., Describe the impact of winemaking methods on water and energy usage and on waste generation., Explain and describe the administrative and regulatory challenges related to winemaking., Describe, recognize, and list common causes and control measures for microbiological, chemical, and physical wine spoilages., Evaluate sanitation in the winemaking environment and relate it to impacts on wine quality., Identify and select appropriate chemical and microbial controls and limits to monitor and control the winemaking process., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: FDSC 5500/VIEN 5500.

class: VIEN 5610
class title: Vineyard Management I
description: This course is designed to develop the relevant skills required for pre-harvest, harvest, and post-harvest management in a winegrape vineyard. Focused on hands-on, active learning, students will spend significant time in the Cornell University vineyards.
outcome: Examine the implementation and outcomes of different harvest strategies., Describe the complex process of determining harvest timing., Apply basic chemistry and biology principles to viticultural & enological techniques used around harvest., Record and use harvest statistics., Examine the effects and control strategies of key pests and diseases., Assess the status of a vineyard going into dormancy., Understand basic tractor operation and maintenance., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 1104 , VIEN 2204  (or concurrent enrollment), one semester of introductory biology, and one semester of introductory chemistry.

class: VIEN 5650
class title: Wine Microbiology
description: Microbes are all around us affecting almost every aspect of our lives. This course focuses on the roles that microbes play in the production and spoilage of wine. Wine microbiology is a 3 credit course (2 lecture credits, 1 laboratory credit).
outcome: Identify the different microbes present during wine production, and describe the positive or negative biological roles that they play during wine production, including stuck/sluggish/spoiled fermentations., Summarize practically relevant aspects of wine microbiology and evaluate microbial issues in wine production., Explain routine microbiological techniques useful in a winery., Develop independent research projects related to the roles of microbes in the winery, including designing and executing experiments to rigorously test hypotheses and/or explore wine microbiology-related topics., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: general microbiology lecture and laboratory, organic chemistry, biochemistry.

class: VIEN 6310
class title: The Science and Technology of Beer Laboratory
description: An introduction to the practical application of brewing. Students will make several different styles of beer in a laboratory setting to understand how raw materials and processing technologies influence the production of recognizable beer styles. Emphasis will be placed on sanitation, raw material selection, yeast selection, and the manipulation of process variables to control product outcomes. Students will also learn the alternatives in current practice for finishing, carbonation, and packaging.
outcome: Summarize the key steps in the brewing process, and contrast these steps to other fermentations., Describe and differentiate beer processing, fermentation, and aging parameters used in different styles of traditional beer production., Explain the role of the raw materials (grains, fruits, and other agricultural products, barrels, etc.) and the choices that distillers have in their use and source., Explain the role of the major components of beer (water, malt, hops, yeast), and the choices that brewers have in their use and source., Explain how different microorganisms can positively or negatively affect the quality of beer., Describe ongoing and emerging technological challenges to the brewing industry., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204 and VIEN 2205/FDSC 2205.

class: VIEN 6400
class title: Wine and Grape Flavor Chemistry
description: Uses a (bio)-chemical perspective to investigate viticulture and enological factors that impact flavor and other quality attributes (mouthfeel, color, stability) of wine and wine grapes.
outcome: Identify and describe (orally and in writing) the key compounds that influence wine organoleptic properties., Identify and describe how viticultural and enological practices affect those key compounds., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: at least one semester of general chemistry and one semester of organic chemistry required. Recommended prerequisite: prior coursework in or knowledge of viticulture and enology.

class: VIEN 6460
class title: Advanced Viticulture Topics
description: This course is designed to delve in-depth into the scientific literature that should drive decision making in vineyard production systems. We will critically evaluate studies from around the world and discuss their applicability to winegrape production systems in a range of climates.
outcome: Students will be able to describe the major environmental, agricultural, and economic challenges facing wine-grape production today., Students will be able to describe to what level science has informed common wine-grape production practices., Students will be able to examine how the academic literature can be applied to wine-grape production., Students will be able to assess the potential contribution of specific scientific studies to the wine-grape industry., Students will be able to identify specific challenges in wine-grape production that need to be addressed by scientific experimentation., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIEN 2204. Graduate students from the School of Integrative Plant Science can enroll without the prerequisite.

class: VIET 1121
class title: Elementary Vietnamese I
description: This course gives a thorough grounding in basic speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in Vietnamese.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: VIET 2201
class title: Intermediate Vietnamese I
description: Continuing instruction in spoken and written Vietnamese.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIET 1122 with a grade of B or above or equivalent as determined by instructor through placement test. 

class: VIET 3301
class title: Advanced Vietnamese I
description: Continuing instruction in spoken and written Vietnamese. Introduction to reading newspapers; the course emphasizes on enlarging vocabulary and increasing reading speed by reading various genres and styles of prose.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VIET 2202 with a grade of B or above or equivalent as determined through placement exam and permission of instructor.

class: VISST 1101
class title: Visual Literacy and Design Studio
description: This course is an introductory design studio.  The primary course objective is to introduce principles of visual literacy as it pertains to two-dimensional and three-dimensional issues in design at all scales.  Concepts about representation, expression, composition, color, form, light, structure, and function will be explored through project based learning.  The emphasis will be on learning explicit compositional concepts, visualization skills, and media techniques as well as implicit design sensitivities to serve the student throughout the rest of his or her DEA experience and beyond.
outcome: Develop grounding in the field through the learning 2D and 3D design principles both in theory and in practice (comprehend discipline and field)., Investigate a number of disciplinary perspectives including painting, typography, mathematics, engineering, architecture, product design, and interiors in the studio projects (apply multi-disciplinary perspectives)., Apply explicit concepts to creative original works to learn the connections between knowledge, research, and design (think critically)., 

class: VISST 2002
class title: Environment and Sustainability Colloquium
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures given by experts, people with different expertise and perspectives who are addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., 

class: VISST 2012
class title: Discussions of Environment and Sustainability
description: This colloquium presents students with diverse approaches at the art-science interface used to interest, educate and motivate people to consider, address and solve environmental and sustainability challenges. It consists of a series of lectures by experts with different perspectives addressing a variety of environmental and sustainability problems with regard to humanistic concern. The small group discussion session allows in-depth engagement with the art-science interface. Building on the possibilities shared by our expert visitors, students in the discussion section will develop their own approach to addressing environmental issues. We will analyze how the ways in which information is shared is as significant as the information itself, and consider "artistic" and "scientific" perspectives as mutually beneficial tools for exploring and communicating our relationship to the environment.
outcome: Develop depth of knowledge, ability to use concepts and analytical tools, and to understand public policy dimensions in sustainability sciences at the art-science interface., Mobilize students' own backgrounds and developing expertise to produce a public-facing display that communicates environmental knowledge in creative ways., 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 2300
class title: American Cinema
description: From the beginning of the twentieth century to the present moment, movies - and in particular Hollywood - have profoundly influenced the ways in which people see, think and talk about the world. Focusing mostly on Hollywood film, this course introduces the study of American cinema from multiple perspectives: as an economy and mode of production; as an art form that produces particular aesthetic styles; as a cultural institution that comments on contemporary issues and allows people to socialize. We will consider the rise of Hollywood in the age of mass production; the star system; the introduction of sound and the function of the soundtrack; Hollywood's rivalry with television; censorship; the rise of independent film, etc. Weekly screenings introduce major American genres (e.g. science fiction, film noir, the musical) and directors (e.g. Hitchcock, Kubrick, Tarantino).
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 2500
class title: Introduction to the History of Photography
description: Provides a lecture survey of the history of photography over a course of two centuries. Starting with its invention in the 1830s, covers the subject topically and chronologically. During the nineteenth century, focus is on technical developments and on the complex relations that situate photography in relation to painting, portraiture, urban life, war, anthropology and ethnology, exploration and travel, and science and industry. Over the course of the twentieth century, photography is enriched by new developments: its use as a modernist and experimental art form, in social documentary and photojournalism, in propaganda, in advertising and fashion. In recent decades, photography has assumed a centrality in the practice of conceptual postmodern art, and is currently undergoing a major transformation in the age of digital media.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 2511
class title: Dance Composition
description: Students compose and present short studies that are discussed and reworked. Problems are defined and explored through class improvisations. Informal showing at end of semester. Includes informal showing of work. Weekly assignments in basic elements of choreography.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 2645
class title: Introduction to Early Modern Art: Cosmopolitanism and Empire
description: This course offers an introduction to the diverse global encounters and exchanges that shaped early modern European art and material culture, c.1400-1650. The course will be structured around nine European imperial and/or cosmopolitan centres and their connections between one another, and with the Ottoman Empire, Asia, Africa, and the Americas. We will explore how global commerce influenced material and artistic consumption, and the ways in which early modern slavery was part and parcel of Europe's art world. Special focus discussions will deepen students' knowledge of artistic materials and media and the ways in which global connections impacted the making of early modern art. Students will gain a broad understanding of early modern art and practices of making, the historical contexts in which art objects were produced, and their social and cultural uses. Students will become familiar with the language and approaches of art history and material culture studies, as well as with key methodologies including globalized, decolonial, critical race, and gender theories.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 2744
class title: Gamelan in Indonesian History and Cultures
description: This course combines hands-on instruction in gamelan, Indonesia's most prominent form of traditional music, and the academic study of the broader range of music found in contemporary Indonesia, including Western-oriented and hybrid popular forms. Students thus engage with music directly, and use it as a lens to examine the myriad social and cultural forces that shape it, and that are shaped by it.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3115
class title: Video and New Media: Art, Theory, Politics
description: The course will offer an overview of video art, alternative documentary video, and digital installation and networked art. It will analyze four phases of video and new media: (1) the development of video from its earliest turn away from television; (2) video's relation to art and installation; (3) video's migration into digital art; (4) the relation of video and new media to visual theory and social movements. Screenings will include early political and feminist video (Ant Farm, Rosler, Paper Tiger TV, Jones), conceptual video of the '80s and '90s (Vasulka, Lucier, Viola, Hill), gay and multicultural video of the '90s (Muntadas, Riggs, Piper, Fung, Parmar), networked and activist new media of the 21st century (Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Disturbance Theater, SubRosa, Preemptive Media). Secondary theoretical readings on postmodernism, video theory, multicultural theory, and digital culture will provide students with a cultural and political context for the discussion of video and new media style, dissemination, and reception.

class: VISST 3175
class title: Global Cinema and Media
description: Global Cinema and Media offers a survey of international film and media history from the late nineteenth century to today. Through a focus on key films and significant epochs, the course traces the evolution of form, style and genre, the medium's changing technologies and business models, as well as film and media's relation to broader cultural, social and political contexts. Screenings of narrative, documentary and experimental films and video will be accompanied by readings in film and media theory and history.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, GLC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3463
class title: Contemporary Television
description: This course considers issues, approaches, and complexities in the contemporary television landscape. As television has changed drastically over the past fifteen years, this course provides students with a deeper understanding of the changes in narratives, technologies, forms, and platforms that structure/restructure the televisual world. Students will grapple with how "new media" forms such as web-series and on-demand internet streaming services have changed primetime television. We will balance our look at television shows with nuanced readings about the televisual media industry. By watching, analyzing, and critiquing the powerful medium of television, students will situate their understanding within a broader consideration of the medium's regulation, production, distribution, and reception in the network and post-network era.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3464
class title: Representational Ethics in Film and Television
description: This course is designed to explore the varied ways that race and gender intersect with the media industry. While common industrial logic suggests these descriptors of identity are not a factor in terms of its business models and assumptions, the reality is much more complex. Race, as well as gender, class, and sexuality, play large parts in how media industries function and in informing and shaping audience expectations and assumptions. Thus, the time spent in class will largely consist of deconstructing several media industries, including film, television, and new media to show just how race, as well as other modes of identity such as gender, sexuality, and class, operate within it. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3555
class title: Comics as a Medium
description: What are comics? While it's easy to identify a cartoon, graphic novel, or comic book, it's hard to understand the wide world of comics. As a medium, comics are part of a global tradition of visual storytelling and sequential art, including premodern tapestries, early modern pamphlets, and modern children's books, political cartoons, and animated films. With a focus on the German-speaking world, we will examine a wide range of comics genres (e.g., fiction, history, autobiography, journalism, comix) and formats (e.g., books, strips, pamphlets, zines). Our discussions will address questions of taste, aesthetics, materiality, censorship, representation, and word-image relations. While we will primarily be reading and writing about comics and comics studies, students will also gain some exposure to making comics.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3650
class title: History and Theory of Digital Art
description: In this course, we will examine the role of electronic and digital technologies in the arts of the late 20th and 21st centuries with emphasis on Europe and North America. Beginning with the cybernetically and systems-inspired work of the late sixties, we will explore early uses of computer technology, including early experiments in synthetic video in the 1970s. An overview of pre-internet telematic experiments will lead to an investigation of net art and later currents of digital art. The ongoing development of behavioral art forms will be a central theme. Critical evaluation of various attitudes concerning technology will be encouraged.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3696
class title: The Arts of Southeast Asia
description: The arts of Southeast Asia are studied in their social context, since in traditional societies creative processes are often mapped on the sequence of events that compose human lives. We will be looking particularly at the gendered ways in which bodies are mapped on the land, and how these various framings are often reflected in the unique relationships that emerge between works of art and textual sources. The South Asian epics of the Ramayana (Story of Rama) and the Mahabharata will be explored during the semester as infinitely renewable sources of inspiration. Special emphasis will be devoted to localized encounters in Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma/Myanmar, Vietnam, and Thailand.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 3798
class title: Fundamentals of Directing I
description: Focused, practical exercises teach the student fundamental staging techniques that bring written text to theatrical life. A core objective is to increase the student's awareness of why and how certain stage events communicate effectively to an audience. Each student directs a number of exercises as well as a short scene.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 4101
class title: Proseminar: Introduction to Methods
description: Works of art have always engendered political, social, and cultural meanings. This seminar presents an introduction to the methods used by art historians and the objects and ideas that constitute the historiography of their discipline. If art history was once understood as the study of the development of style in "European art", over the past century its practitioners have attempted to embrace a "global" perspective and to address issues of class, ethnicity, nationality, sexual orientation, and gender. Readings will focus on historically situating methods and the implications of their cross-cultural application. They will be discussed in the framework of institutions, apparatuses and practices that have shaped the field, identifying how these have contributed to systemic mechanisms of hegemony and exclusion. Papers will encourage students to put methods into practice, realizing in the process that subject matter is not an isolated choice to which methods are applied, but something that profoundly affects the approach that the researcher brings to the writing and conceptualizing and doing of art history. 
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 4153
class title: Topics in Feminist Media Arts
description: Fall 2024 Topic: Feminist Posthumanisms in Visual Arts. While feminist art in new media address traditional feminist concerns such as the female body, identity, representation, feminist history, and consumerism, others directly engage with recent theoretical currents on the Anthropocene, posthumanism, and new materialisms that view humans and non-humans as co-dependent. Non-humans include environmental factors, animals, plants, bacteria, and machines. This seminar will examine work by contemporary artists from various geographical areas and cultural traditions engaged with posthumanist perspectives in relation to relevant theoretical texts and previous feminist media arts.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, SCD-AS) (CA-AG, D-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 4835
class title: Performance Studies: Theories and Methods
description: An understanding of performance as object and lens, modality and method, is integral to scholarship and research across the humanities and social sciences. Charting the advent and defining principles of performance studies, this course explores the interdisciplinary history of the field, including its association with anthropology, visual studies, theater, gender studies, sociology, psychology, literature, philosophy, and critical race studies. This class examines performance as a means of creative expression, a mode of critical inquiry, and an avenue for public engagement. We will attend to both the practice of performance - as gesture, behavior, habit, event, artistic expression, and social drama - and the study of performance - through ethnographic observation, spectatorship, documentation, reproduction, analysis, and writing strategies. Through a study of research paradigms and key issues related to performance, we will explore not only what this highly contested term "is" and "does," but when and how, for whom, and under what circumstances.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS) (CA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VISST 4852
class title: Shadowplay: Asian Art and Performance
description: Shadowplay is a superb medium for storytelling. As with many performing arts in Asia, neither the highly stylized images of puppets, nor its musical, or linguistic complexity detract from its wide popularity. Why does an art that appears so obscure exercise such broad appeal? This seminar explores the playful and politically adept fluctuations of shadows across screens from India to Mainland and Island Southeast Asia. We will also briefly examine East Asian developments, particularly in China and Japan. In each of the countries where shadow theatre exists it has acquired its own repertory and a distinct technique and style of its own. This aesthetic has translated locally into paint, sculpture, architecture, cinema, and modern and contemporary installation art. Classes will meet regularly in the Herbert F. Johnson Museum.
distribution categories: (ALC-AS, HST-AS) (CA-AG, HA-AG, LA-AG)

class: VTBMS 3460
class title: Principles of Animal Physiology
description: General course in animal physiology emphasizing principles of operation, regulation, and integration common to a broad range of living systems from the cellular to the organismal level. Structure/function relationships are stressed along with underlying physico-chemical mechanisms.
outcome: Students should be able to rationalize the operation of major organ systems., Students should understand the organization of multisystem regulatory loops., Students should be able to derive and understand the basic equations defining the physical operating characteristics of organ systems., 
distribution categories: (OPHLS-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: BIOG 1500 and BIOG 1440 or BIOG 1445 or one year of college biology, one year chemistry, and mathematics or equivalent AP credit.

class: VTBMS 7010
class title: Mouse and Stem Cell Pathology
description: Introduction to principles and methods of pathology. Pathology role in stem cell research, regenerative medicine and cancer biology. Systematic evaluation of mouse models, with a particular attention to such topics as experimental design, model validation, identification of novel phenotypes, histotechnology and mouse necropsy.
outcome: Understand principles and methods of pathology as discipline., Experience in planning of animal experiments, collecting and processing of biological materials., Become familiar with pathology terminology., Learn about the role of stem cell pathology in stem cell research and regenerative medicine., 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: BIOAP 4130. 

class: VTBMS 7020
class title: The Practice of Laboratory Animal Medicine
description: A laboratory animal veterinarian must be trained in the regulatory aspects of research and teaching utilizing animals; in addition they must understand the principles of facility management and design. Also, to work with researchers, a lab animal veterinarian must have knowledge of basic research methodologies and animal welfare issues. This course may also be of interest to other veterinarians, veterinary students, and researchers who wish to understand the workings of the specialized field that oversees and enables the use of animals in research and teaching. The topics covered include: Laboratory Animal Medicine: Laws, Regulations, and Policies; Design and Management of Animal Facilities; Anesthesia, Analgesia, and Euthanasia; Techniques of Experimentation; Control of Biohazards used in animal research; Selected zoonoses/xenozoonoses; Genetic monitoring; Transgenic and knock-out mice; Factors influencing animal research; Animal models in biomedical research; Research in Lab Animal and Comparative Medicine; Lab Animal Behavior. The course will meet for 1 hour weekly and will extend over the course of two years, though each term is independent and can be taken separately.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic knowledge of anatomy and pathology in comparative animal species.

class: VTBMS 7030
class title: The Biology and Diseases of Laboratory Animals
description: Intended for veterinarians entering the field of laboratory animal medicine.  It may also be of interest to other veterinarians, veterinary students, and researchers with a basic knowledge of anatomy and pathology who use animals in research or teaching.  This course will cover the main laboratory animal species (rodents, rabbits, non-human primates, ruminants, swine, dogs, cats, ferrets, reptiles, amphibians, and fish).  The biology, husbandry, diseases, pathology, and main research uses of these species will be covered.  The course will meet for 2 hours weekly and will extend over the course of two years.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: basic knowledge of anatomy and pathology in comparative animal species.

class: VTBMS 7200
class title: Biomedical and Biological Sciences Seminar
description: Designed to train graduate students in public presentation and critical analysis of scientific data. Students are required to give a seminar on their research, and provide constructive feedback to others on the quality of their presentation and data.

class: VTMED 5100
class title: The Animal Body (Foundation Course I)
description: Designed to enable students to understand the principles of veterinary anatomy at the gross, microscopic, and ultrastructural levels. Emphasizes developmental anatomy to the extent that it reflects determination of adult form and species differences. Radiologic and related imaging techniques are used throughout the course to assist in the understanding of normal structural anatomy. Understanding of the anatomic basis of common surgical procedures is achieved during the various dissection procedures. The course is based on tutorials with significant emphasis on practical laboratories. Lectures and modules complement student learning.

class: VTMED 5200
class title: Cell Biology and Genetics (Foundation Course II)
description: Designed to develop an appreciation of the molecular and cellular basis of animal health and disease. Students gain an understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate cell function, the molecular signaling processes that form the basis of integrated function and the response to disease, and the mechanisms underlying inherited traits and genetic disease. Emphasis is placed on defining and characterizing normal cell function and on understanding how mutations in specific genes promote disease. The course will be divided into three complementary sections: Principles of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Principles of Cell Signaling, and a Focus on the Cell Biology of Cancer. Materials covered early in the course will form the foundation for later discussion. Throughout the course, clinical cases are utilized to illustrate the concepts presented.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5100.

class: VTMED 5210
class title: Fundamentals of General Pathology
description: Building on the knowledge of normal anatomy and histology presented in VTMED 5100, this course emphasizes recognition of alterations on tissue architecture at the gross and microscopic level as well as clinical laboratory data. Students will learn to use appropriate terminology to describe and interpret lesions as well as trace the sub cellular alterations that lead to these alteration. The goal of this course is to allow students to recognize basic tissue reactions to injury and begin to apply this knowledge to clinical situations.Building on the knowledge of normal anatomy and histology presented in VTMED 5100, this course emphasizes recognition of alterations on tissue architecture at the gross and microscopic level. Students will learn to use appropriate terminology to describe and interpret lesions as well as trace the sub cellular alterations that lead to these alteration. The goal of this course is to allow students to recognize basic tissue reactions to injury and begin to apply this knowledge to clinical situations.

class: VTMED 5310
class title: Function and Dysfunction: Part II (Foundation Course IIIb)
description: Continuation of VTMED 5300.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5300.

class: VTMED 5400
class title: Host, Agent, and Defense (Foundation Course IV)
description: This course seeks to develop an understanding of the interplay between the Immunological system of the host and the most significant bacterial and viral agents that cause disease in animals.  Lectures focus primarily on adaptive and innate immunity, as well as bacterial and viral pathogens and the diseases they cause.  Autoimmunity, epidemiological methods to investigate infectious disease at the herd and single animal levels, and techniques and tools to control infectious disease are also important components of the course.  In the laboratory, animals are used to illustrate some aspects of infectious diseases.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5310.

class: VTMED 5410
class title: Veterinary Parasitology
description: Provides a basic introduction to animal parasites of veterinary importance, concentrating mainly on the biology, control, and diagnosis of protozoan and metazoan parasites.  Emphasizes parasites representative of significant disease processes or of significant clinical importance to veterinarians.  Elaborates on the biology and pathogenesis of these major pathogens with the ultimate goal being to maximize the recognition of the major disease manifestations induced by the different groups of organisms.  Laboratories stress certain aspects of some important parasite groups.

class: VTMED 5510
class title: Animal Health and Disease: Part II
description: Continuation of VTMED 5500 topics include endocrinology, hematology, anesthesia, surgery, urology, dentistry, gastrointestinal diseases, liver diseases, theriogenology, oncology, exotics, miscellaneous, emergency and critical care, primary care. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5500.

class: VTMED 5600
class title: Ambulatory and Production Medicine
description: Clinical service rotation in which students accompany ambulatory clinicians on farm and stable calls and learn the skills and procedures necessary for operation of a modern veterinary practice offering primary care to large animal clients. Routine herd health visits are conducted for cattle, horses, sheep, goats, and swine. Reproductive evaluations (including pregnancy and fertility examinations), nutritional evaluation, and disease prevention are stressed. Herd health programs also include vaccinations, parasite control, mastitis prevention, and routine procedures. With appropriate herds, analysis of computerized performance data is conducted and discussed with the owner. In addition to assisting with routine scheduled work, students participate in diagnosis and medical or surgical treatment of ill or injured animals. This includes rotating assignments for night and weekend duty.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5601
class title: Small Animal Community Practice
description: Our community practice, housed in a stand-alone facility as of June 2018, offers full services for our patients of all life stages including preventive medicine, radiology, dentistry, and surgery. Our primary care practice is designed to provide our clinical year students with experience in appointments, procedures, surgery, client communications, and cloud-based electronic medical records to prepare them as entry level veterinarians upon graduation from the CUCVM. The goals and design of the Small Animal Community Practice are to model a non-academic general practice setting where students act as primary case clinicians collecting histories, performing physical exams, assessing their patients, and creating diagnostic and therapeutic plans individualized to a given patient and client. Student clinicians are supervised by rotation faculty and supported by licensed veterinary technicians.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5602
class title: Small Animal Medicine
description: Structured to provide supervised clinical experience in the practice of small animal medicine.  The course is conducted in the Companion Animal Hospital of the Cornell University Hospital for Animals.  Students interact directly with clients presenting their pets for primary or referral medical care.  Under the supervision of the clinical faculty and staff, the students are expected to formulate and carry out plans for the diagnostic evaluation and medical management of these patients.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5603
class title: Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery Service
description: Clinical service rotation that exposes the student to the practice of soft tissue surgery within the companion animal hospital. Students participate in morning and evening patient rounds, appointments, clinical decision making (diagnostics, medical and surgical interventions), and daily patient care under the direction of the faculty and house officers of the surgery service. Students are afforded the opportunity to assist and observe in the operating room. Patient care, client communication, goal-oriented decision making, and an introduction to abdominal surgery are emphasized.Clinical service rotation that exposes the student to the practice of soft tissue surgery within the companion animal hospital. Students participate in morning and evening patient rounds, appointments, clinical decision making (diagnostics, medical and surgical interventions), and daily patient care under the direction of the faculty and house officers of the surgery service. Students are afforded the opportunity to assist and observe in the operating room. Patient care, client communication, a variety of treatment options to fit different real-world scenarios and an introduction to abdominal surgery are emphasized.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5604
class title: Large Animal Medicine Service
description: Students assigned to this service participate with the faculty, technicians, and residents of the Large Animal Medicine service in the diagnosis and care of patients.  The goal of this course is for students to acquire knowledge and skills in history taking, physical examination, selection and completion of appropriate ancillary tests, diagnosis, treatment plan, and patient care.  Daily rounds and discussions are used to monitor patient progress and further educate students. If time allows, sit-down rounds to discuss medical disorders are provided.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5605
class title: Large Animal Surgery
description: Clinical rotation structured to provide supervised clinical experience in the practice of large animal surgery. Under the direction of faculty and house staff, students participate in the diagnosis, surgical treatment, and care of patients presented to the Equine and Farm Animal Hospital. Training through patient care is supplemented by formal rounds and didactic instruction.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5606
class title: Anesthesiology Service
description: The course is designed to provide clinical experience in the use of anesthetics in small companion animals, horses, and farm animals. Students participate in selecting suitable anesthetic techniques for patients in the Cornell University Hospital for Animals and then implement those techniques under the supervision of faculty and residents. The goal is for students to learn the skills and the thought processes necessary to perform safe anesthesia in a modern veterinary practice and to provide perioperative analgesia. Students planning to enter equine, production, or mixed animal practice who elect to take a second anesthesia rotation can choose to spend this rotation exclusively in the Equine and Nemo Farm Animal Hospitals.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5607
class title: Dermatology Service
description: During this clinical rotation, students participate in the diagnosis and management of skin disorders in small and large animals. Patients are examined by appointment and through consultation with other hospital services. Mandatory rounds are conducted either in-person or through recordings as determined by the rotation's service chief. Quizzes may be given at the discretion of the service chief to assess dermatology knowledge and progress.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5608
class title: Ophthalmology Service
description: A large inpatient and outpatient referral case load plus numerous inpatient consultations for other hospital services allow students to become confident acquiring the beginning skills needed for diagnostic ophthalmology. Students perform many routine ophthalmic diagnostic tests (Schirmer tear testing, fluorescein staining, tonometry) and learn and gain confidence using indirect ophthalmoscopes, slit lamps, and tonometers.  Students are introduced to other ocular diagnostic tests, including culture, cytology, ultrasound, as well as more advanced diagnostic modalities according to the caseload. The rotation provides students an opportunity to observe common and uncommon therapeutic and surgical procedures. Many of the ophthalmology cases are complex referral cases but adequate routine case material is presented to prepare students for the common eye problems seen in veterinary practice.  A competent ocular examination is the goal of this rotation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5609
class title: Pathology Service
description: The pathology rotation strives to integrate gross pathology with other diagnostic modalities.  Students will work in groups of four to six for the two week rotation performing necropsies on mammals, birds, exotic species, and laboratory animals under the guidance of anatomic pathology faculty and residents.  Students will prepare written reports of the necropsies performed and discuss the findings at daily morning rounds. Students will also be instructed by faculty of the Animal Health Diagnostic Center with expertise in ancillary diagnostic techniques.  Students are expected to learn to use diagnostic testing regimens as integral parts of comprehensive diagnostic and therapeutic plans.  Instruction will consist primarily of the discussion of clinical cases with emphasis on laboratory diagnostics.  Students are expected to lead and participate in these discussions and will be evaluated on their ability to do so.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5610
class title: Radiology Service
description: A two-week clinical experience in the imaging section of the Cornell University Hospital for Animals.  Students use radiographic, ultrasonographic, CT, MRI, and nuclear medicine imaging techniques to evaluate animal patients under treatment in the Cornell University Hospital for Animals.  Students obtain and interpret radiographic and ultrasonographic studies with guidance from radiology faculty, residents and technical staff.  On-line teaching materials  are used to familiarize students with radiographic and  cross-sectional imaging examples of common diseases of large and small animal species.  Small-group discussions are included to present and discuss the teaching files and current cases, in addition to the safe use of x-ray producing equipment.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5611
class title: Small Animal Clinical Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
description: Management of both emergent and critical cases represents a significant component of the practice of veterinary medicine. The focus of this clinical rotation will be the development of a knowledge base and a comprehensive set of skills necessary for a veterinarian to perform adequately in these areas, within a structured format. These skills will include the appropriate evaluation (triage) and stabilization of emergency patients, the management of post-operative and other critical patients, and sensitive and effective client communication. Participants access relevant information from various sources related to emergency and critical care medicine and understand and apply these principles to clinical cases. Students will participate in the management of incoming emergency cases as well as having primary patient care responsibilities in both intensive care and intermediate care units. Students will work closely with interns, residents, technicians, and faculty on the Emergency &amp; Critical Care Service to become familiar with technical and nursing procedures as well as to develop clinical skills and a systematic approach to clinical cases.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5612
class title: Fourth-Year Seminar
description: This required course gives each senior student the responsibility and opportunity of selecting and studying a disease entity on the basis of a case or series of cases, or to conduct a short-term, clinically oriented research project under the direction of a faculty member.  In either instance, an oral report will be presented at a weekly seminar.  A written report is also submitted within 2 weeks after the seminar.  All participants are encouraged to foster an atmosphere in which discussion, exchange of ideas, and the airing of controversial opinions might flourish. Veterinary students of all four classes and all faculty and staff members are also invited and encouraged to attend.

class: VTMED 5613
class title: Small Animal Surgery Orthopedic Surgery Service
description: Clinical service rotation that exposes the student to the practice of orthopedic surgery and medicine within a hospital environment. Students participate in rounds; diagnostic techniques; planning of therapy; and daily care of dogs and cats under the direction of an intern, surgical residents, and/or faculty. Students assist experienced surgeons in the operating room. Client communications and the basics of orthopedics in general practice are emphasized. Students are expected to be able to successfully perform an orthopedic examination and localize the lameness by the end of the rotation.Clinical service rotation that exposes the student to the practice of orthopedic surgery and medicine under hospital conditions. Students participate in rounds; diagnostic techniques; planning of therapy; and daily care of dogs and cats under the direction of an intern, surgical residents in training, and faculty. Students assist experienced surgeons in the operating room. Client communications and the basics of orthopedics in general practice are emphasized. Students are expected to be able to successfully perform an orthopedic examination and localize the lameness by the end of the rotation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 5701
class title: Veterinary Practice: Physical Examination (Foundation Course VIIa)
description: Complements and augments material learned in VTMED 5100  (Foundation Course  I - The Animal Body). Complements and augments material learned in Foundation Course  I - The Animal Body. The class is divided into lab groups which meet for 4-5 hours each week during the first 11 weeks of the fall semester. This live animal laboratory course teaches the skills of observation, auscultation, palpation, and percussion working with cows, horses, dogs and cats. The body systems are examined sequentially and follow the order of study in Foundation Course I.

class: VTMED 5704
class title: Veterinary Practice: Introduction to Clinical Procedures (Foundation Course VIId)
description: The laboratory component of the course builds on the Core Clinical Skills taught in previous sections of block VII. Communication Exercises are a significant component of the course. In these small group exercises, students use core communication skills taught in a previous section of block VII to work through case scenarios with faculty and simulated clients. An introduction to nutrition is provided via lectures on energetics, vitamins and minerals, pet food labels, feeds, and feeding practices.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5703.

class: VTMED 5706
class title: Veterinary Practice: Professional Development (Foundation Course VIIf)
description: In this course, students examine governmental regulation of the veterinary profession, including proper drug usage, extra label drug use (FDA), controlled substances (DEA), environmental issues (EPA), and biosecurity measures for the practicing DVM.  The course includes a review of communication skills important for students as they enter their clinical rotations; communication training culminates in small group Communication Exercises in which students work through a clinical case working with a programmable robotic dog patient and simulated clients.  Building on material presented in the first-year curriculum, additional core career development and personal financial planning information is presented in this course. Topics include financial planning for the new graduate, contract law and negotiation, debt repayment, job search and interview skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5705.

class: VTMED 6423
class title: Clinical Diagnostic Parasitology
description: The course is intended to give students experience in diagnosing parasitic infections by performing appropriate parasitological testing methods on clinical samples from patients on their rotation. Students evaluate the test results in terms of treatment or management of the infections. If clinical specimens are not available, appropriate materials are provided for study and evaluation. Ambulatory students typically do qualitative and perhaps quantitative flotations on samples from large animal cases they have encountered that week. In CPS, one hour is spent testing samples from current dog and cat patients, while a second hour is devoted to a discussion of the treatment of common endo-and ecto-parasites. Pathology students typically examine and identify intact parasites they retrieved from various organs at necropsy and review common parasites of hosts encountered. This course is considered to be a logical extension to Foundation Course IV, Host, Agent, and Defense, and is expected to build on the didactic material presented in Large and Small Animal Parasitology.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5510.

class: VTMED 6436
class title: Directing Community Practice
description: The format is a both peer-mentored and service-learning which takes place in a clinical setting. Eight student directors organize and supervise bimonthly healthy pet clinics where they mentor other, less experienced students to provide preventative veterinary care to animals of under served citizens in the Ithaca community.

class: VTMED 6530
class title: Llama Tutorial
description: Autotutorial or group tutorial course covering common problems of llamas and alpacas. Participants are provided with study guides consisting of brief case descriptions and sample study questions. Reference is made to textbooks and journal articles to assist students in finding the answers to the questions efficiently. Grading is based on an oral exam. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5400.

class: VTMED 6531
class title: Poisonous Plants
description: Field trips demonstrate toxic plants growing in natural or cultivated settings.  Lectures address economically important poisonous plants native to the United States.  Information presented includes plant identification, natural habitat, toxic principles, clinical signs of toxicosis, and treatment and prevention of poisoning in animals.  Some of the major toxic principles found in plants and considered in detail in the course are nitrates, cyanide, oxalates, photodynamic agents, alkaloids, and mycotoxins.

class: VTMED 6601
class title: Cardiology Service
description: Provides students with the opportunity to put into practice what they have learned in the foundation years.  The management of the most common cardiac diseases are emphasized including congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, and secondary cardiac diseases.  All species are examined, large and small, although the majority are small animals.  Diagnostics including cardiovascular physical examination, electrocardiography, radiography, and echocardiography are taught.  The rotation includes clinical work, didactic teaching, and self-initiated digging for information.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6602
class title: Laboratory Animal Medicine
description: Laboratory animal medicine is a diverse field in which veterinarians directly impact the well-being of animals used in research, teaching and testing. Laboratory animal veterinarians assist researchers in achieving their goals, while encouraging replacement, reduction, and refinement of animal use. Treatment of animals and preparation of preventive medicine programs requires the laboratory animal veterinarian to have knowledge of the biology and comparative medicine of a wide variety of species. It is also essential for laboratory animal veterinarians to have knowledge of research methodologies, and animal models of disease as well as a good understanding of state and federal regulations, and guidelines governing the use of animals. In addition, occupational health and safety, and animal facility design are important parts of an institutional animal care program, to which laboratory animal veterinarians have input. The diversity of species, and the novel circumstances that arise regularly in this field make laboratory animal medicine an exciting and unique discipline of veterinary medicine. This rotation is an introduction to the specialty of laboratory animal medicine.  Students are exposed to all aspects of a laboratory animal veterinarian's role. Activities include but are not limited to: accompanying laboratory animal veterinarians on clinical rounds of Cornell University's research animal facilities; participating in diagnostic and preventive medicine plans; attending review sessions on the biology, medicine, pathology, husbandry of traditional and non-traditional lab animal species; incorporating information on current legislation regulating the care and use of research animals; and exposure to various research activities on the Cornell University Campus.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6605
class title: Special Opportunities in Clinical Veterinary Medicine
description: Provides opportunities for students who have completed the prerequisites to explore professional areas of clinical interest that are either not available or expand upon the veterinary curriculum. Please consult the VTMED 6605 syllabus for additional information.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5500 and VTMED 5510.

class: VTMED 6608
class title: Clinical Oncology
description: Management and prevention of cancer in companion animals represents a significant component of the practice of veterinary medicine.  The focus of this clinical rotation is the development of a comprehensive set of skills necessary for a veterinarian to become an advocate for the client/patient with cancer.  These skills include appropriate initial evaluation of animals with cancer; sensitive and effective client and referring veterinarian communication; ability to access relevant information from numerous sources related to cancer management;and ability to  understand and apply principles of surgical, medical and radiation oncology as well as techniques specifically related to minimize pain and treatment-related side effects in cancer patients.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6613
class title: Equine Health Management Rotation
description: The objective of the Equine Health Management Rotation is to prepare students for diagnosing and treating common conditions of the horse in practice, whether it be exclusively equine or a mixed practice.  The course places an emphasis on dentistry, podiatry, deworming, vaccination, and basic veterinary procedures. Many hands-on laboratories are taught on Cornell-owned horses.  In addition, the course strives to provide information regarding equine veterinary business and the equine industry with guest speakers.  The strengths of this course are the hands-on laboratories and ability to hone your technical skills, along with the interaction with practicing equine veterinarians.The objective of the Equine Specialty Rotation is to prepare students for diagnosing and treating common conditions of the horse in practice, whether it be exclusively equine or a mixed practice.  The course places an emphasis on dentistry, podiatry, deworming, vaccination, and basic veterinary procedures which are taught on Cornell-owned horses.  In addition, the course strives to provide information regarding equine veterinary business and the equine industry with guest speakers.  The strengths of this course are the hands-on laboratories and ability to hone your technical skills, along with the interaction with practicing equine veterinarians.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6614
class title: Large Animal Emergency and Critical Care
description: The evaluation and management of critical patients and other emergency problems represents a significant component of the practice of large animal veterinary medicine.  As emergency cases are frequently presented to these practitioners, it is imperative such veterinarians are well prepared.  The focus of this clinical rotation is for students to acquire the knowledge, skills and thought processes necessary to triage large animal emergencies and manage critical patients.  These skills include the appropriate evaluation, stabilization and treatment of emergency patients, and the management of post-operative cases and other critical patients.  Participants access relevant information from various sources related to emergency and critical care medicine and surgery in an effort to understand and apply these principles to clinical cases.  Participants primarily have patient care responsibilities in the Large Animal Intensive Care Unit of the Cornell University Hospital for Animals and work closely with technicians and clinicians to develop familiarity with technical and nursing procedures.  In addition, students will learn common veterinary skills and techniques using teaching animals when time permits.  The large animal emergency and critical care rotation is primarily an after-hours rotation.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6615
class title: Special Topics in Ambulatory and Production-Animal Medicine
description: Provides specialized opportunity in Production Medicine.  Consists of participation in an experience designed to improve knowledge and skills regarding producation systems. Examples of focus areas include livestock production medicine, poultry and fish farming, milk quality assessment, small ruminant medicine, herd management experience, and specialized diagnostic testing. This course is availble in 2 week increments after application to the course leader at least one month in advance of the rotation. Presentation of the completed expereince to a student club or in Ambulatory rounds is required.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6616
class title: Small Animal Dentistry and Oral Surgery
description: This rotation is designed to introduce students to clinical small animal dentistry and oral surgery.  By the end of the rotation, students are expected to be capable of:  performing a thorough oral examination, obtaining and interpreting intraoral radiographs, discussing appropriate therapeutic options, performing basic periodontal procedures and simple and surgical extractions, and administering pertinent regional nerve blocks.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6618
class title: Clinical Neurology
description: The Neurology/Neurosurgery (NNS) clinical rotation at Cornell University's College of Veterinary Medicine is a 2 week time period in which the student is directly involved in the diagnosis, management and treatment of animals with a diverse array of neurologic disorders. Gait evaluation and the neurological examination are skills that can be applied to any species and these are emphasized over the rotation. During the rotation students will have multiple opportunities to practice and get feedback on their neurological examinations. This allows students time and practice so that they can apply what they have learned to whichever species they intend to work with following graduation. We have previously discussed other species with neurological conditions and examinations when students have made their interests known. Although clinics is primarily devoted to dogs and cats, we occasionally consult with other services such as large animal medicine and surgery and exotics. The student is expected to assist in all aspects of the rotation, including case rounds, patient receiving, medical and surgical treatments, client communication, and record-keeping. In addition to learning through clinical exposure, the student will be taught principles of clinical neurology during "sit-down" topic rounds. The primary goal of the rotation for the student is for the student to become comfortable and confident in performing and correctly interpreting the neurologic examination in a clinical setting.  A secondary goal is the accumulation and application of practical clinical knowledge pertaining to neurologic diseases of companion animals. To do this effectively we discuss our clinical approach to cases so that students can practice their clinical decision making skills and approach to neurological patients.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6619
class title: Clinical Pathology Rotation
description: This two-week course consolidates principles of clinical pathology and provides students with additional experience in using clinical pathology data to help with interpretation, diagnosis and management of clinical cases, through the use of archived and current clinical cases. Students will become more experienced and confident in examining blood and cytology smears, interpreting electrophoretogram results and working through clinical case material. Students are required to interpret a "mystery" slide (hematology or cytology) and case with clinical pathologic data in the last week of the rotation. There is substantial interaction with clinical pathology faculty, staff and residents. The case material can be somewhat tailored to the students' areas of interest.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6623
class title: Clinical Rotation in Shelter Medicine: Principles and Practice
description: This clinical rotation embedded in SPCA of Tompkins County with travel to other area shelters. It exposes students to the principles and practice of veterinary medicine in a real animal shelter setting. Students will provide direct veterinary medical care to individual shelter animals and spend time learning and applying population health principles. These principles include infectious disease diagnosis, treatment, and management; shelter wellness and protocol-based medicine; shelter anesthesia, high-quality, high-volume spay-neuter and dentistry; shelter animal behavioral assessment, pharmaceuticals and modification, low-stress animal handling, and population and capacity planning. Cases vary with season and shelter intake. The daily schedule includes topic-based online modules, clinical work, and topic rounds. Students will also be expected to complete on-line webinars and assignments to round out their learning, and to prepare and give a live CE presentation for area shelter personnel. Although spay/neuter is certainly part of shelter medicine and will be part of this rotation, this is NOT a spay/neuter intensive rotation; caseload depends on the needs of the shelter(s). Weekend duty is optional and as-needed.This clinical rotation embedded in SPCA of Tompkins County exposes students to the principles and practice of veterinary medicine in a real animal shelter setting. While students will provide direct veterinary medical care to individual shelter animals, students will also spend time learning and applying population health principles. These principles include infectious disease diagnosis, treatment, and management; shelter wellness and protocol-based medicine; shelter anesthesia, high-quality, high-volume spay-neuter and dentistry; shelter animal behavioral assessment, pharmaceuticals and modification, low-stress animal handling, and population and capacity planning. Cases vary with season and shelter intake. The daily schedule includes topic-based online modules, clinical work, and topic rounds. Students will also be expected to complete several on-line webinars and assignments to round out their learning. Although spay/neuter is certainly part of shelter medicine and will be part of this rotation, this is NOT a spay/neuter intensive rotation; caseload will depend on the needs of the shelter(s). Week-end duty is optional and as-needed.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520. Highly recommended prerequisite: VTMED 6425.

class: VTMED 6624
class title: Primary Care Surgery Service
description: The Primary Care Surgery service is a two-week rotation intended to provide students an opportunity to perform physical exams (with a focus on Fear Free technique) and surgical procedures in the context of general practice. The patients they treat and are ultimately responsible for, are adoptable shelter/rescue dogs and cats. Emphasis is placed on addressing patients from a comprehensive perspective: intake to discharge. Student clinicians are accountable for all peri-operative care. By the end of the rotation, students will have had the opportunity to improve physical exam skills, surgical competence, confidence, and efficiency within the limits of accepted technique. Student clinicians are highly encouraged to experience different methods of performing key skills. There is a significant focus on formulating appropriate treatment plans, the ergonomics of tying good knots, surgical technique as a primary care surgeon, and pain/anxiety management. Close attention is placed on writing thorough medical records and on client communication skills. Student surgeons work on critical decision making and collaboration with their team. Anesthesia support is provided by licensed veterinary technicians from the Anesthesia Service to ensure continuity in the methods of induction, patient monitoring, and recovery.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6628
class title: Clinical Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
description: The Clinical Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation Service focusses heavily on mobility and function and sees a variety of patients including primary lameness workups, post-surgical rehabilitation, sport dog conditioning, and geriatric care.  Foundation coursework in both physiology and musculoskeletal anatomy are applied to clinical cases from movement to healing to pain control.  Lameness workups include orthopedic and neurological examinations as well as functional assessment, objective gait analysis, and pain scoring.  Various modalities including but not limited to water therapy to neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES), therapeutic laser, acupuncture, extracorporeal shockwave, therapeutic ultrasound, and regenerative medicine will be introduced and incorporated as indicated.  The course will foster a unique clinical thought processes as a physical therapist to identify impairments and functional deficits, allowing for the development of appropriate physiotherapy goals and exercises.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6629
class title: Wildlife Medicine
description: This rotation will expose students to the practice of wildlife medicine in a busy hospital setting with the guidance and mentorship of faculty, zoological medicine interns and residents, and four licensed wildlife technicians. Active participation in case management will provide the student with abundant hands-on experience in basic general clinical skills applicable to any species, an understanding of common native wildlife diseases and their management, as well as involvement in advanced wildlife medicine and surgery techniques. Students of any practice/career interest are welcome, and no prior wildlife experience is necessary. The rotation will be tailored to each student's career goals and experience level. No on-call duty is required. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6630
class title: Clinical Exotic Animal Medicine
description: The rotation on clinical exotic animal medicine is meant to provide the basis for veterinary students to take care of non-traditional pets, including rabbits, ferrets, rodents, parrots, chickens, snakes, lizards and chelonians. Veterinary students will be involved in the daily activities of the Exotic Pet Service at Cornell University Hospital for Animals, such as examination, hospitalization, diagnostics and treatments of exotic pets.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 5520.

class: VTMED 6724
class title: Senior Seminar
description: Attendance at 10 of the senior seminar sessions presented during the semester is required for completion of this course. Selected class members will serve as moderators for the senior seminar presentations. Other students will take brief on-line quizzes covering the information supplied in the seminars for the week. All students will pose questions on-line to the seniors presenting the seminars.

class: VTMED 6745
class title: One Health: Conservation with Communities- Seminars
description: "Conversations in Conservation" is a fall semester debriefing course in with students will reflect and expand learning through presentations of projects (seminars) and experiences, case-directed discussions using experiential journal notes and topical readings from relevant literature, and student-led discussion of impacts/solutions to local problems, with participation of listed faculty and community partners.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTMED 6743 and VTMED 6744.

class: VTMED 6748
class title: Expanding Horizons
description: The Expanding Horizons course offers Cornell veterinary students an opportunity to gain experience in international veterinary medicine and engage in novel veterinary medicine experiences outside of the United States. Students spend the summer (typically 8-10 weeks) or clinical blocks (6 weeks) participating in an independent veterinary research project or veterinary experience in a foreign country. Students are responsible for identifying contacts in the country of interest, developing a project idea, and submitting a written project proposal to the International Experiences Committee for consideration. College faculty and the Office of Student and Academic Services may assist and advise students on project development and preparation for the experience. Students in the course will be assessed through participation in virtual, asynchronous course activities.

class: VTMED 6778
class title: CVBE Capstone I
description: This course intends to create an individual project-based experience in veterinary business that expands and incorporates the knowledge acquired through prerequisite courses that focus on financial literacy, personal and professional development, financial and organizational management, and entrepreneurship. Students who meet course prerequisites will apply for course enrollment directly to instructor by supplying project proposal. Course students will develop a project in collaboration with a CVBE stakeholder that will utilize and implement veterinary business and management skills. Students will complete their project in a manner that does not interfere with clinical responsibilities. Students will finalize their capstone experience through delineated deliverables.

class: VTMED 6897
class title: Teaching Projects in Veterinary Medicine
description: This is a variable credit course in which students contribute to the teaching of a course in the veterinary curriculum (VTMED). Student responsibilities may include providing instructional support in laboratories, preparing teaching material, giving presentations, providing feedback to students on assignments, grading, or performing other appropriate tasks. Students are assessed based on the quality of performance in their responsibilities. Students a required to submit a brief reflection summarizing what they have accomplished and learned as a result of the teaching project. Projects must be submitted via the online application process before the first day of the term.

class: VTMED 6898
class title: Special Projects in Veterinary Medicine
description: Students work individually with a CVM faculty member to pursue an area of particular interest that is not part of the established curriculum. Specific course objectives and course content should be relevant to career interests in veterinary medicine and should reflect the expertise of the faculty. Students are required to submit a brief reflection summarizing what they accomplished and learned as a result of the special project. Projects must be submitted via the online application process before the first day of the term.

class: VTMED 6899
class title: Research Projects in Veterinary Medicine
description: Students work individually in the research environment of a CVM faculty member involved in veterinary or biomedical research. Specific course objectives and course content should be relevant to career interests in veterinary medicine and should reflect the expertise of the faculty. Students are required to submit a brief reflection summarizing what they accomplished and learned as a result of the research opportunity. Projects must be submitted via the online application process before the first day of the term.

class: VTPEH 4990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Public Health
description: Research credits with public health program faculty may include topics of public health and environmental change, food security, local agriculture, and civic engagement. Contact faculty in the program directly to inquire about available research topics/projects.

class: VTPEH 6101
class title: Public Health Foundations I
description: This course will introduce students to the history and role of public health, and will set the foundation of public health practice on the two guiding paradigms: the 10 essential public health functions, and the One Health/Planetary Health approach to public health prevention and problem solving. Students build their public health competency via investigating a breadth of public health issues, including both chronic and infectious disease, and the impact of our environment and climate on disease spread, acquisition, and impact. 

class: VTPEH 6104
class title: Epidemiology in Practice
description: This applied course will cover foundational concepts of epidemiology, including data collection, measures of disease frequency and association, diagnostic testing, bias, and study design. 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: VTPEH 6105 or BTRY 6010.

class: VTPEH 6107
class title: Public Health Assessment Writing Lab
description: This course examines public health issues through a One Health/Planetary Health lens. Through case studies and examples, students learn to apply systems thinking approaches to address public health challenges, and analyze interactions between human, animal and environmental health. There is a substantial writing component to the course.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: VTPEH 6181.

class: VTPEH 6108
class title: Applied Data Analysis
description: This course serves to complement data-oriented public health courses to help students hone their data cleaning and analysis skills.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: VTPEH 6105.

class: VTPEH 6111
class title: Infectious Disease and Health
description: This course comprises two parts. The lecture section will cover viral, bacterial and parasitic agents important for public health, as well as infectious disease epidemiology, surveillance, and infectious disease countermeasures. The discussion section will address similar topics using cases and professional experiences to drive small-group discussion and applied learning.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Recommended prerequisite: undergraduate biology and chemistry.

class: VTPEH 6114
class title: Applied Epidemiology: Disease Surveillance and Outbreak Response
description: Global development is driving disease outbreaks; communicable disease prevention and control is a foundational element of public health, reducing death and disability. Core to this practice is the ability to assess and monitor population health; investigate, diagnose, and address health hazards and root causes; communicate effectively to inform and educate; and enable equitable access to prevention and care services. In short, you will be a public health asset if you can engage in applied epidemiology to prevent, detect, mitigate, and respond to communicable disease outbreaks. In this course, you will build and hone your skills as a field epidemiologist. To do so, you will reinforce your understanding of bacterial, viral, and parasitic diseases of concern, and then practice methods to detect outbreaks, to investigate causes, and to support public health prevention through risk mitigation, communication, and policy change.  

class: VTPEH 6121
class title: Food Systems and Health
description: The goal of this course is to introduce students to connections between food systems and health. The course uses concepts, theories and methods from multiple disciplines. Students will explore the complex interconnections of food systems and public health needs and learn from interdisciplinary experts and professionals in the fields of local and international public health, economics, sociology, and environment.

class: VTPEH 6123
class title: Food Systems Approaches to Food Safety
description: Every year, over 48 million people experience a foodborne illness. In this course you will learn how foodborne illnesses are investigated, and how outbreaks are traced through complex food systems back to the contaminated food. By conducting patient interviews, you will gain practical experience in solving foodborne disease outbreaks. You will also contribute to preventing foodborne outbreaks in our community by working with local food processors to reduce food safety risks.
outcome: Identify food safety risks throughout specific farm-to-fork food systems, Describe relevant disease surveillance systems and their roles in outbreak surveillance and detection, Acquire practical investigation skills by collecting data for use in real-life foodborne disease investigations, Implement root cause analyses to facilitate foodborne disease outbreak investigations, Synthesize data of recent national foodborne disease outbreaks help support prevention (via policy change, systems change, education, etc.) , 
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTPEH 6121, VTPEH 6122 or equivalent. 

class: VTPEH 6132
class title: Public Health Emergency Management
description: This course examines the basic principles of public health emergency management; various types of disasters and emergencies including infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters and bioterrorism; and how emergency management principles can be applied to public health incidents. Students will be introduced to domestic and international public health emergency preparedness planning, common concepts and processes used such as the Incident Command System (ICS), the National Incident Management System (NIMS), the National Response Framework, and the Strategic Framework for Emergency Preparedness. Legal and ethical considerations relevant to public health emergency management will also be covered. Past incidents, emergencies and disasters will be reviewed, and lessons learned to inform future preparation and response will be discussed. Students will participate in small groups for in-class scenarios and exercises and prepare a press statement regarding a potential public health emergency threat.

class: VTPEH 6141
class title: Planetary Health
description: Degradation of the environment through climate change, pollution, land use shifts, and more can impact human health in myriad ways. Food access and nutrition, infectious diseases, chronic diseases, mental health, and the impacts of migration and conflict are increasingly being tied to these environmental changes. The Planetary Health course will introduce students to the anthropogenic threats to human health, examine the pathways from environmental change to human health, and design and analyze interventions to improve both human and environmental health. Using systems and interdisciplinary perspectives, we will explore the interconnected challenges of providing for human and ecosystem health in case studies. We will also evaluate possible solutions to planetary health problems and their implications for equity, human health, and environmental health. 

class: VTPEH 6171
class title: Applied Ethnographic Assessment in Public Health Practice
description: This course will introduce students to applied ethnographic assessment. Such assessments use rapid, focused data-gathering techniques and both quantitative and qualitative analyses to address specific questions relevant to social and cultural conditions of individuals and communities, including those relevant to public health practice. They involve describing contexts, processes, preferences, motivations and/or relationships, and can be used for formative research, needs assessment, intervention design, and/or program evaluation (Sangaramoorthy and Kroeger, 2020:3). In this course, we will discuss theoretical underpinnings and data collection and analysis procedures for ethnographic techniques such as direct observations, and social mapping, free listing, and pile sorting, which can be employed in interviews and/or focus group discussions. For each method, students will practice using these methods to explore a community-identified need.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: research methods course strongly advised; VTPEH 6181 or equivalent.

class: VTPEH 6175
class title: Introduction to GIS for Public Health
description: Geospatial Information Systems (GIS) are becoming increasingly used to advance equity and sustainability programs. This course will provide an introduction to different GIS software packages, as they are currently used by researchers and policymakers. We will explore existing mapping tools currently used to advance health equity in federal policy, create maps using ArcGIS Online, perform geospatial analysis using ArcGIS Desktop and QGIS, and spatially link various disparate datasets to enhance our analyses. Students are encouraged to bring topics and questions they want to explore, as they will have the chance to work on them throughout the course.

class: VTPEH 6181
class title: Public Health Practice - Assessment
description: Via this course, students will gain an understanding of the importance of comprehensive assessment of a public health need. Students will be exposed to, and expected to practice, assessment methods that are relevant to the field of public health, including literature reviews and secondary data analyses. This will be practiced via in-depth discussion of real-life cases, and by self-directed research, small group work, and peer review. 

class: VTPEH 6183
class title: Public Health Practice – Monitoring, Evaluation, and Quality Improvement
description: Via this seminar, students will gain an understanding of the value and process of implementing routine monitoring and evaluation and continuous quality improvement with public health interventions. This will be practiced via in-depth discussion of real-life cases, and by self-directed research, planning, and peer review, including development of a M&amp;E/CQI plan that could be implemented for a real project. In-person Fall; On-line Winter.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTPEH 6181, VTPEH 6182. 

class: VTPEH 6184
class title: Public Health Practice - Communication
description: Public health efforts are usually dependent on people changing their behavior, attitudes, or perceptions. Communication is a key component of facilitating that change. This course helps students understand the influence of communication in public health and how to use theory to identify the barrier to the desired behavior for a particular audience. Students will learn how to conduct an audience analysis in order to develop targeted, relevant, compelling and accessible communication products. Over the term, we will incorporate theory, best practices, design principles, examples, critiques, cultural considerations, and exploration of various communication forms for different audiences and needs. We will address the basics of relevant communication theory, including theories of behavior change and the role of narrative and emotion. We will address issues of health literacy and the association communication strategies needed to advance public health and health equity. We will cover how communication relates to pressing (inter)national public health issues: climate change, sustainability, misinformation, racism and discrimination. With this foundation, students will gain appreciation for communication's influence on public health and determinants at individual and population levels. Students will assess a range of public health communication efforts and their impacts on audiences, evaluate audience needs, and design a theory-informed public health communication product tailored to a well-defined audience for a specific goal. This product will be developed iteratively through individual and lab-based work over the term. Each student will be assigned a mentor and who has significant experience with behavior change communication and audience analysis. The mentor will provide regular feedback on the progress of the final product. For the final product, working with an external partner is optional, though students who have a relationship with a community partner, clinician and/or researcher may work on a communication-related project for them, subject to approval by course faculty. When possible, faculty will share opportunities for other community-engaged work for students without an existing partner.

class: VTPEH 6191
class title: Professional Skills and Explorations in Public Health
description: The goal of this course is to prepare students for applied practice and careers in public health through explorations of public health sectors and careers, and through developing knowledge and skills in networking and interviews, writing effective cover letters and resumes, cultural humility and allyship, and community building and respect. Whether you are an experienced practitioner or just starting out in your professional career, this course offers a chance to better understand and articulate your professional goals and utilize resources toward your professional growth.

class: VTPEH 6193
class title: Special Topics in Public Health
description: The department teaches "trial" courses under this number. Offerings vary by semester and are advertised by the department before the semester starts. Courses offered under the number will be approved by the department curriculum committee, and the same course is not offered more than twice under this number.

class: VTPEH 6194
class title: Public Health Toolkit: Applied Practice, Negotiation, and Presenting Transferable Skills
description: In this course, students reflect on and document applied practice experiences, develop a portfolio to document competence, and develop and practice public health negotiation skills. Students describe and presenting transferable skills for external audiences, drawing on coursework and applied projects, including in a field work poster session. Students also begin to develop a capstone project aligned with career goals integrative skillsets.

class: VTPEH 6990
class title: Graduate Research in Public Health
description: Research credits with public health program faculty may include topics of public health and environmental change, food security, local agriculture, civic engagement, health equity, social justice, environmental justice. Contact faculty in the program directly to inquire about available research topics/projects.

class: VTPMD 2990
class title: Undergraduate Research in Epidemiology
description: Mentored research apprenticeship program designed to give laboratory experience in applied epidemiology to qualified unmatriculated high school students (participating in Cornell Summer College) or Cornell underclassmen. Students are placed in a research laboratory with a designed project under the direct supervision of a research associate (upper-level graduate student, post-doc, or faculty member). Students are graded on preparation, participation in laboratory, academic life, and appropriate acquisition of techniques. At the end of the six-week session, they are expected to give a brief (15- to 20-minute) oral presentation on their work and submit a manuscript in a form suitable for publication. The faculty director of the laboratory has ultimate responsibility for evaluating each student's work and assigning the grade.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: one year of basic biology (score of 5 on Biology Advanced Placement Examination of College Entrance Examination Board or BIOG 1000 level) or permission of instructor.

class: VTPMD 6640
class title: Introduction to Epidemiology
description: Course covers fundamental epidemiology concepts and methods in the investigation of determinants of health or disease in populations. Topics include causation, measures of disease frequency and association, sampling methods, selection and interpretation of diagnostic tests, type and characteristics of observational and controlled studies, and bias and confounding.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Corequisite: BTRY 6010 or permission of instructor.

class: VTPMD 6660
class title: Advanced Methods in Epidemiology
description: Concepts introduced in VTPMD 6640 and VTPMD 6650 are further developed, with emphasis on statistical methods. Topics include interaction, effect modification, stratified analysis, matching and multivariate (logistic regression) methods, survival analysis, repeated measures, and strategies for the analysis of epidemiologic data.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: VTPMD 6650, BTRY 6020.

class: VTPMD 7080
class title: Epidemiology Seminar Series
description: Discusses advanced theoretical and analytical epidemiologic concepts and techniques.

class: VTPMD 7660
class title: Graduate Research
description: Enables students outside the section of epidemiology to receive graduate research credits for projects with epidemiological components.

class: VTPMD 7990
class title: Independent Studies in Epidemiology
description: The purpose of this course is to investigate an epidemiologic topic with one of the instructors. It provides experience in problem definition, research design, and the analysis of epidemiologic data.

class: WOLOF 1117
class title: Elementary Wolof I
description: This course is a basic introduction to the Wolof language. It aims to build students' basic understanding of the sentence structure of the language. It combines written and oral practice based on major cultural aspects of traditional and modern Wolof society. These exercises will include production, listening comprehension, reading comprehension, and writing.

class: WOLOF 2118
class title: Intermediate Wolof I
description: This course will further your awareness and understanding of the Wolof language and culture, as well as improve your mastery of grammar, writing skills, and oral skills. Course materials will incorporate various types of text including tales, cartoons, as well as multimedia such as films, videos, and audio recordings.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: WOLOF 1118 or permission of instructor.

class: WOLOF 3113
class title: Advanced Wolof I
description: This course will further your awareness and understanding of the Wolof language and culture and improve your mastery of grammar, writing skills, and oral expression. Course materials will incorporate various text types, including tales, poetry, literature, and multimedia such as films, videos, television, and radio. The instructor will provide all course materials. At the end of the course, you will be able to understand basic Wolof and make yourself understood in everyday situations.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: WOLOF 2119 or equivalent.

class: WRIT 1001
class title: Academic Writing Workshop
description: This academic writing workshop is designed for students who have faced significant challenges meeting the expectations of college-level writing. Students will explore what it means to read and meaningfully engage with scholarly texts and to develop an academic inquiry. WRIT 1001 provides a small-scale learning environment for students to learn and practice strategies for drafting and revising and for producing clear and precise academic prose.

class: WRIT 1037
class title: Tutorial in Academic Writing
description: This writing tutorial is designed for undergraduate students who need more focused attention to master the expectations of academic writing. The course emphasizes the analytic and argumentative writing and critical reading essential for university-level work.

class: WRIT 1370
class title: FWS: Elements of Academic Writing
description: Join this course to study the essential elements of academic writing and to learn flexible and sustainable strategies for producing interesting, clear, and precise academic prose that can address a variety of audiences and meet diverse rhetorical aims. WRIT 1370/WRIT 1380 is a smaller FWS (capped at 12 students) that spends more time navigating the steps in the writing process in order to respond to each student's individual needs and build confidence and reflective practice. As in all FWSs, students practice higher-order thinking, close reading, and analyzing evidence. They also complete 4-5 major writing assignments. This course places greater emphasis on in-class writing, one-on-one conferences with the teacher, peer workshopping, discussion, and learning to talk about how different types of writing work. Students will deeply engage diverse course materials (journalism, scholarly articles, podcasts, films, etc.) on topics like art, literature, and relevant social issues to explore ideas about a text, write for specific audiences, and develop creativity, style and voice.  Follow this link for more information: WRIT 1370/80 - Elements of Academic Writing.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: WRIT 1390
class title: Special Topics in Writing
description: This course provides the opportunity for students to resolve significant writing challenges that have interfered with their academic progress. Students must have ongoing writing projects on which to work. Instruction is in weekly tutorials. Interested students should go to 174 Rockefeller for more information.

class: WRIT 1420
class title: FWS: Research and Rhetoric
description: Drawing upon personal or academic experiences and interests, students select their own topics and design research portfolios that highlight significant analytic research. To do this, students step through the Cornell Library gateway and receive a semester-long guided tour through one of the world's most amazing research libraries––its vast search engines, its abundant print and electronic collections, its precious special collections and archives. This introduction to college research explores using data bases, evaluating information, and engaging both to produce effective academic writing. Students will study techniques of analysis for converting scholarly information into a thesis, synthesizing and acknowledging sources, developing voice and style, and crafting technically and rhetorically sophisticated prose.
distribution categories: (WRT-AG)

class: WRIT 1450
class title: FWS: Communicating Big Ideas: Climate Change Rhetoric
description: Record heat and historic floods, epic droughts and raging wildfires. These are just a few examples of how the world is changing due to anthropogenic (or human-induced) climate change. In this class we will read and write about issues of environmental justice from different genres and disciplinary perspectives. Some of the questions we will address include: how scientists talk to policy makers, how young people connect to the natural world and each other, how indigenous people make use of traditional knowledge to keep the land in balance, and how people across the globe speak out for climate justice.

class: WRIT 7100
class title: Teaching Writing
description: This course prepares graduate instructors of Cornell's First-Year Writing Seminars to teach courses that both introduce undergraduates to particular fields of study and help them develop writing skills they will need throughout their undergraduate careers. Seminar discussions and readings on pedagogical theories and practices provide an overview of the teaching of writing within a disciplinary context. Participants develop written assignments to be used in their own First-Year Writing Seminars.

class: WRIT 7101
class title: Writing in the Majors Seminar
description: Teaching assistants assigned to Writing in the Majors projects enroll in a six-week course on teaching strategies in advanced instruction.

class: YIDSH 2276
class title: Intermediate Yiddish
description: Intended for intermediate students, this is the third in a three-course sequence, designed to enable students to meet the College of Arts &amp; Sciences language requirement. Students will increase their understanding of the language in cultural context and will further develop their capacity to produce both spoken and written Yiddish.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: YIDSH 1777 or permission of instructor.

class: YORUB 1108
class title: Introduction to Yoruba I
description: A two-semester beginner's course in Yoruba Language and Culture. Organized to offer Yoruba language skills and proficiency in speaking, reading, listening, writing, and translation. Focus is placed on familiar informal and formal contexts, e.g., home, school, work, family, social situations, politics, etc. Course uses Yoruba oral literature, proverbs, rhetoric, songs, popular videos, and theater, as learning tools for class comprehension. First semester focuses on conversation, speaking, and listening.  Second semester focuses on writing, translation and grammatical formation. Through the language course students gain basic background for the study of an African culture, arts, and history both in the continent and in the diaspora. Yoruba language is widely spoken along the west coast of Africa and in some African communities in diaspora.  Yoruba video culture, theater, music, and arts has a strong influence along the west coast and in the diaspora.A two-semester beginner's course in Yoruba Language and Culture. Organized to offer Yoruba language skills and proficiency in speaking, reading, listening, writing, and translation. Focus is placed on familiar informal and formal contexts, e.g., home, school, work, family, social situations, politics, etc. Course uses Yoruba oral literature, proverbs, rhetoric, songs, popular videos, and theater, as learning tools for class comprehension. First semester focuses on conversation, speaking, and listening.  Second semester focuses on writing, translation and grammatical formation. Through the language course students gain basic background for the study of an African culture, arts, and history both in the continent and in the diaspora. Yoruba language is widely spoken along the west coast of Africa and in some African communities in diaspora.  Yoruba video culture, theater, music, and arts has a strong influence along the west coast and in the diaspora.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)

class: YORUB 2110
class title: Intermediate Yoruba I
description: The intermediate course extends the development of the main language skills-reading, writing, listening, and conversation. The course deepens the development of correct native pronunciation, the accuracy of grammatical and syntactic structures; and the idiomatic nuances of the language. Students who take the course are able to (1) prepare, illustrate, and present Yoruba texts such as poems, folktales, advertisements, compositions, letters, (2) read Yoruba literature of average complexity, (3) interpret Yoruba visual texts of average difficulty, (4) comprehend Yoruba oral literature and philosophy-within the context of African oral literature and philosophy-of basic complexity. Through the Yoruba language students appreciate African oral literature and philosophy. The primary textual media are Yoruba short stories, poems, short plays, films, songs, and newspapers.
distribution categories: (FL-AG)
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: YORUB 1109.

class: YORUB 3110
class title: Advanced Yoruba I
description: This course will help students expand their understanding of the Yoruba language through the communicative approach. We will focus on the four skills, speaking, listening, learning, and writing.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: YORUB 2111.

class: ZULU 1113
class title: Elementary Zulu I
description: A beginning course in conversational isiZulu, using Web-based materials filmed in South Africa. Emphasis on the sounds of the language, including clicks and tonal variation, and on the words and structures needed for initial social interaction. Brief dialogues concern everyday activities; aspects of contemporary Zulu culture are introduced through readings and documentaries in English.

class: ZULU 2116
class title: Intermediate Zulu I
description: Development of fluency in speaking, listening, reading, and writing, using Web-based materials filmed in South Africa. Students describe and narrate spoken and written paragraphs. Review of morphology; concentration on tense and aspect. Materials are drawn from contemporary popular culture, folklore, and mass media.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ZULU 1116 or permission of instructor.

class: ZULU 3113
class title: Advanced Zulu I
description: Development of fluency in using idioms, speaking about abstract concepts, and voicing preferences and opinions. Excerpts from oral genres, short stories, and television dramas. Introduction to other South African languages and to issues of standardization, dialect, and language attitude.
prerequisites/co-requisites: Prerequisite: ZULU 2117 or permission of instructor. 

